BOOK THREE 



quaintances, and the countess reread the letter 
each time with fresh pleasure and each time 
discovered in it fresh proofs of Nik61enka's vir- 
tues. How strange, how extraordinary, how joy- 
ful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely per- 
ceptible motion of whose tiny limbs she had 
felt twenty years ago within her, that son about 
whom she used to have quarrels with the too- 
indulgent count, that son who had first learned 
to say "pear" and then "granny," that this son 
should now be away in a foreign land amid 
strange surroundings, a manly warrior doing 
some kind of man's work of his own, without 
help or guidance. The universal experience of 
ages, showing that children do grow impercep- 
tibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist 
for the countess. Her son's growth toward man- 
hood, at each of its stages, had seemed as extra- 
ordinary to her as if there had never existed 
the millions of human beings who grew up in 
the same way. As twenty years before, it seemed 
impossible that the little creature who lived 
somewhere under her heart would ever cry, 
suck her breast, and begin to speak, so now she 
could not believe that that little creature could 
be this strong, brave man, this model son and 
officer that, judging by this letter, he now was. 

"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" 
said she, reading the descriptive part of the let- 
ter. "And what a soul! Not a word about him- 
self. . . . Not a word! About some Denisov or 
other, though he himself, I dare say, is braver 
than any of them. He says nothing about his 
sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! 
And how he has remembered everybody! Not 
forgetting anyone. I always said when he was 
only so high I always said . . ." 

For more than a week preparations were be- 
ing made, rough drafts of letters to Nicholas 
from all the household were written and copied 
out, while under the supervision of the count- 
ess and the solicitude of the count, money and 
all things necessary for the uniform and equip- 
ment of the newly commissioned officer were 
collected. Anna Mikhaylovna, practical wom- 
an that she was, had even managed by favor 
with army authorities to secure advantageous 
means of communication for herself and her 
son . She had opportunities of sending her letters 
to the Grand Duke Constan tine Pdvlovich, who 
commanded the Guards. The Rost6vs supposed 
that The Russian Guards, A broad, was quite a 
definite address, and that if a letter reached 
the Grand Duke in command of the Guards 
there was no reason why it should not reach 
the Pavlograd regiment, which was presuma- 



bly somewhere in the same neighborhood. And 
so it was decided to send the letters and money 
by the Grand Duke's courier to Boris and Boris 
was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters 
were from the old count, the countess, Ptya, 
Ve*ra, Natasha, and S6nya, and finally there 
were six thousand rubles for his outfit and vari- 
ous other things the old count sent to his son. 

CHAPTER VII 

ON THE twelfth of November, Kutiizov's active 
army, in camp before Olmiitz, was preparing 
to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors 
the Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, 
just arrived from Russia, spent the night ten 
miles from Olmiitz and next morning were to 
come straight to the review, reaching the field 
at Olmiitz by ten o'clock. 

That day Nicholas Rost6v received a letter 
from Borfs, telling him that the Ismaylov regi- 
ment was quartered for the night ten miles 
from Olmiitz and that he wanted to see him as 
he had a letter and money for him. Rostov was 
particularly in need of money now that the 
troops, after their active service, were stationed 
near Olmiitz and the camp swarmed with well- 
provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering 
all sorts of tempting wares. The Pavlograds 
held feast after feast, celebrating awards they 
had received for the campaign, and made ex- 
peditions to Olmiitz to visit a certain Caroline 
the Hungarian, who had recently opened ares- 
taurant there with girls as waitresses. Rost6v, 
who had just celebrated his promotion to a 
cornetcy and bought Denfsov's horse, Bedouin, 
was in debt all round, to his comrades and the 
sutlers. On receiving Boris' letter he rode with 
a fellow officer to Olmiitz, dined there, drank 
a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the 
Guards' camp to find his old playmate. Rost6v 
had not yet had time to get his uniform. He 
had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with 
a soldier's cross, equally shabby cadet's riding 
breeches lined with worn leather, and an of- 
ficer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse 
he was riding was one he had bought from a 
Cossack during the campaign, and he wore a 
crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on 
one side of his head. As he rode up to the camp 
he thought how he would impress Borfs and all 
his comrades of the Guards by his appearance 
that of a fighting hussar who had been under 
fire. 

The Guards had made their whole march as 
if on a pleasure trip, parading their cleanli- 
ness and discipline. They had come by easy 



WAR AND PEACE 



stages, their knapsacks conveyed on carts, and 
the Austrian authorities had provided excel- 
lent dinners for the officers at every halting 
place. The regiments had entered and left the 
town with their bands playing, and by the 
Grand Duke's orders the men had marched all 
the way instep (a practice on which the Guards 
prided themselves), the officers on foot and at 
their proper posts. Boris had been quartered, 
and had marched all the way, with Berg who 
was already in command of a company. Berg, 
who had obtained his captaincy during the 
campaign, had gained the confidence of his 
superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and 
had arranged his money matters very satisfac- 
torily. Boris, during the campaign, had made 
the acquaintance of many persons who might 
prove useful to him, and by a letter of recom- 
mendation he had brought from Pierre had be- 
come acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolk6n- 
ski, through whom he hoped to obtain a post 
on the commander in chief's staff. Berg and 
Boris, having rested after yesterday's march, 
were sitting, clean and neatly dressed, at a 
round table in the clean quarters allotted to 
them, playing chess. Berg held a smoking pipe 
between his knees. Boris, in the accurate way 
characteristic of him, was building a little pyra- 
mid of chessmen with his delicate white fingers 
while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his 
opponent's face, evidently thinking about the 
game as he always thought only of whatever he 
was engaged on. 

"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" 
he remarked. 

"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a 
pawn and then removing his hand. 

At that moment the door opened. 

"Here he is at last!" shouted Rost6v. "And 
Berg too! Oh, you petisenfans, allay cushay 
dormir!" * he exclaimed, imitating his Russian 
nurse's French, at which he and Boris used to 
laugh long ago. 

"Dear me, how you have changed!" 

Boris rose to meet Rost6v, but in doing so 
did not omit to steady and replace some chess- 
men that were falling. He was about to em- 
brace his friend, but Nicholas avoided him. 
With that peculiar feeling of youth, that dread 
of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a 
manner different from that of its elders which 
is often insincere, Nicholas wished to do some- 
thing special on meeting his friend. He wanted 
to pinch him, push him, do anything but kiss 
hima thing everybody did. But notwithstand- 

1 "Little children, go to bed and sleep."-TR. 



ing this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friend- 
ly way and kissed him three times. 

They had not met for nearly half a year and, 
being at the age when young men take their 
first steps on life's road, each saw immense 
changes in the other, quite a new reflection of 
the society in which they had taken those first 
steps. Both had changed greatly since they last 
met and both were in a hurry to show the 
changes that had taken place in them. 

"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh 
as if you'd been to a fete, not like us sinners of 
the line," cried Rost6v, with martial swagger 
and with baritone notes in his voice, new to 
Boris, pointing to his own mud-bespattered 
breeches. The German landlady, hearing Ros- 
tov's loud voice, popped her head in at the 
door. 

"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink. 

"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them ! " 
said Boris. "I did not expect you today," he 
added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by 
Bolk6nski an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a 
friend of mine. I did not think he would get it 

to you so quickly Well, how are you? Been 

under fire already?" asked Boris. 

Without answering, Rostov shook the sol- 
dier's Cross of St. George fastened to the cord- 
ing of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged 
arm, glanced at Berg with a smile. 

"As you see," he said. 

"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. 
"And we too have had a splendid march. You 
know, of course, that His Imperial Highness 
rode with our regiment all the time, so that we 
had every comfort and every advantage. What 
receptions we had in Poland! What dinners 
and balls! I can't tell you. And the Tsarvich 
was very gracious to all our officers." 

And the two friends told each other of their 
doings, the one of his hussar revels and life in 
the fighting line, the other of the pleasures 
and advantages of service under members of 
the Imperial family. 

"Oh, you Guards!" said Rost6v. "I say, send 
for some wine." 

Boris made a grimace. 

"If you really want it," said he. 

He went to his bed, drew a purse from un- 
der the clean pillow, and sent for wine. 

"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to 
give you," he added. 

Rost6v took the letter and, throwing the 
money on the sofa, put both arms on the table 
and began to read. After reading a few lines, 
he glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his 



BOOK THREE 



133 



eyes, hid his face behind the letter. 

"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said 
Berg, eying the heavy purse that sank into the 
sofa. "As for us, Count, -we get along on our 
pay. I can tell you for myself . . ." 

"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rost6v, 
"when you get a letter from home and meet 
one of your own people whom you want to 
talk everything over with, and I happen to be 
there, I'll go at once, to be out of your way! 
Do go somewhere, anywhere ... to the devil 1" 
he exclaimed, and immediately seizing him by 
the shoulder and looking amiably into his face, 
evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his 
words, he added, "Don't be hurt, my dear fel- 
low; you know I speak from my heart as to an 
old acquaintance." 

"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite un- 
derstand," said Berg, getting up and speaking 
in a muffled and guttural voice. 

"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," 
added Boris. 

Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a 
spot or speck of dust, stood before a looking 
glass and brushed the hair on his temples up- 
wards, in the way affected by the Emperor 
Alexander, and, having assured himself from 
the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had 
been noticed, left the room with a pleasant 
smile. 

"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Ros- 
tov, as he read the letter. 

"Why?" 

"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written 
and to have given them such a fright! Oh, what 
a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly. 
"Well, have you sent Gabriel for some wine? 
All right let's have some!" 

In the letter from his parents was enclosed a 
letter of recommendation to Bagrati6n which 
the old countess at Anna Mikhdylovna's advice 
had obtained through an acquaintance and 
sent to her son, asking him to take it to its des- 
tination and make use of it. 

"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Ros- 
t6v, throwing the letter under the table. 

"Why have you thrown that away?" asked 
Boris. 

"It is some letter of recommendation . . . 
what the devil do I want it for!" 

"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking 
it up and reading the address. "This letter 
would be of great use to you." 

"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's 
adjutant." 

"Why not?" inquired Boris. 



"It's a lackey's job!" 

"You are still the same dreamer, I see," re- 
marked Boris, shaking his head. 

"And you're still the same diplomatist! But 
that's not the point. . . . Come, how are you?" 
asked Rost6v. 

"Well, as you see. So far everything's all 
right, but I confess I should much like to be an 
adjutant and not remain at the front." 

"Why?" 

"Because when once a man starts on military 
service, he should try to make as successful a 
career of it as possible." 

"Oh, that's it!" said Rost6v, evidently think- 
ing of something else. 

He looked intently and inquiringly into his 
friend's eyes, evidently trying in vain to find 
the answer to some question. 

Old Gabriel brought in the wine. 

"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked 
Boris. "He would drink with you. I can't." 

"Well, send for him . . . and how do you get 
on with that German?" asked Rost6v, with a 
contemptuous smile. 

"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant 
fellow," answered Boris. 

Again Rost6v looked intently into Boris* 
eyes and sighed. Berg returned, and over the 
bottle of wine conversation between the three 
officers became animated. The Guardsmen told 
Rost6v of their march and how they had been 
made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. 
They spoke of the sayings and doings of their 
commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories 
of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, 
kept silent when the subject did not relate to 
himself, but in connection with the stories of 
the Grand Duke's quick temper he related with 
gusto how in Galicia he had managed to deal 
with the Grand Duke when the latter made a 
tour of the regiments and was annoyed at the 
irregularity of a movement. With a pleasant 
smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had 
ridden up to him in a violent passion, shout- 
ing: "Arnautsl" 1 ("Arnauts" was the Tsare"- 
vich's favorite expression when he was in a 
rage) and called for the company commander, 

"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at 
all alarmed, because I knew I was right. With- 
out boasting, you know, I may say that I know 
the Army Orders by heart and know the Regu- 
lations as well as I do the Lord's Prayer. So, 
Count, there never is any negligence in my 

1 Arnauts is a Turkish name for the Albanians, 
who supplied the Turks with irregular cavalry. 

-TR. 



'34 



WAR AND PEACE 



company, and so my conscience was at ease. I 

came forward " (Berg stood up and showed 

how he presented himself, with his hand to his 
cap, and really it would have been difficult for 
a face to express greater respect and self- 
complacency than his did.) "Well, he stormed 
at me, as the saying is, stormed andstormedand 
stormed! It was not a matter of life but rather 
of death, as the saying is. 'Albanians!' and 'dev- 
ils!' and 'To Siberia!' " said Berg with a saga- 
cious smile. "I knew I was in the right so I kept 
silent; was not that best, Count? . . . 'Hey, are 
you dumb?' he shouted. Still I remained silent. 
And what do you think, Count? The next day 
it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the 
Day. That's what keeping one's head means. 
That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting his 
pipe and emitting rings of smoke. 

"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling. 

But Boris noticed that he was preparing to 
make fun of Berg, and skillfully changed the 
subject. He asked him to tell them how and 
where he got his wound. This pleased Rost6v 
and he began talking about it, and as he went 
on became more and more animated. He told 
them of his Schon Grabern affair, just as those 
who have taken part in a battle generally do 
describe it, that is, as they would like it to have 
been, as they have heard it described by others, 
and as sounds well, but not at all as it really 
was. Rost6v was a truthful young man and 
would on no account have told a deliberate lie. 
He began his story meaning to tell everything 
just as it happened, but imperceptibly, invol- 
untarily, and inevitably he lapsed into false- 
hood. If he had told the truth to his hearers 
who like himself had often heard stories of at- 
tacks and had formed a definite idea of what 
an attack was and were expecting to hear just 
such a story they would either not have be- 
lieved him or, still worse, would have thought 
that Rostov was himself to blame since what 
generally happens to the narrators of cavalry 
attacks had not happened to him. He could 
not tell them simply that everyone went at a 
trot and that he fell off his horse and sprained 
his arm and then ran as hard as he could from 
a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell 
everything as it really happened, it would have 
been necessary to make an effort of will to tell 
only what happened. It is very difficult to tell 
the truth, and young people are rarely capable 
of it. His hearers expected a story of how be- 
side himself and all aflame with excitement, he 
had flown like a storm at the square, cut his 
way in, slashed right and left, how his saber 



had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, 
and so on. And so he told them all that. 

In the middle of his story, just as he was 
saying: "You cannot imagine what a strange 
frenzy one experiences duringanattack/'Prince 
Andrew, whom Boris was expecting, entered 
the room. Prince Andrew, who liked to help 
young men, was flattered by being asked for 
his assistance and being well disposed toward 
Boris, who had managed to please him the day 
before, he wished to do what the young man 
wanted. Having been sent with papers from 
Kutii/ov to the Tsardvich, he looked in on 
Boris, hoping to find him alone. When he came 
in and saw an hussar of the line recounting his 
military exploits (Prince Andrew could not 
endure that sort of man), he gave Boris a pleas- 
ant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes 
he looked at Rost6v, bowed slightly and wea- 
rily, and sat down languidly on the sofa: he 
felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad 
company. Rostov flushed up on noticing this, 
but he did not care, this was a mere stran- 
ger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that 
he too seemed ashamed of the hussar of the 
line. 

In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, 
ironical tone, in spite of the contempt with 
which Rostov, from his fighting army point of 
view, regarded all these little adjutants on the 
staff, of whom the newcomer was evidently one, 
Rost6v felt confused, blushed, and became si- 
lent. Boris inquired what news there might be 
on the staff, and what, without indiscretion, 
one might ask about our plans. 

"We shall probably advance," replied Bol- 
k6nski, evidently reluctant to say more in the 
presence of a stranger. 

Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great 
politeness, whether, as was rumored, the allow- 
ance of forage money to captains of companies 
would be doubled. To this Prince Andrew an- 
swered with a smile that he could give no 
opinion on such an important government or- 
der, and Berg laughed gaily. 

"As to your business," Prince Andrew con- 
tinued, addressing Boris, "we will talk of it 
later" (and he looked round at Rost6v). "Come 
to me after the review and we will do what is 
possible." 

And, having glanced round the room, Prince 
Andrew turned to Rostov, whose state of 
unconquerable childish embarrassment now 
changing to anger he did not condescend to 
notice, and said: "I think you were talking of 
the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?" 



BOOK THREE 



"I was there," said Rost6v angrily, as if in- 
tending to insult the aide-de-camp. 

Bolk6nski noticed the hussar's state of mind, 
and it amused him. With a slightly contemptu- 
ous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories 
now told about that affair!" 

"Yes, stories!" repeated Rost6v loudly, look- 
ing with eyes suddenly grown furious, now at 
Boris, now at Bolk6nski. "Yes, many stories! 
But our stories are the stories of men who have 
been under the enemy's fire! Our stories have 
some weight, not like the stories of those fel- 
lows on the staff who get rewards without do- 
ing anything!" 

"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said 
Prince Andrew, with a quiet and particularly 
amiable smile. 

A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of 
respect for this man's self-possession mingled 
at that moment in Rost6v's soul. 

"I am not talking about you," he said, "I 
don't know you and, frankly, I don't want to. 
I am speaking of the staff in general." 

"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew in- 
terrupted in a tone of quiet authority, "you 
wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with 
you that it would be very easy to do so if you 
haven't sufficient self-respect, but admit that 
the time and place are very badly chosen. In a 
day or two we shall all have to take part in a 
greater and more serious duel, and besides, 
Drubetsk6y, who says he is an old friend of 
yours, is not at all to blame that my face has 
the misfortune to displease you. However," he 
added rising, "you know my name and where 
to find me, but don't forget that I do not re- 
gard either myself or you as having been at all 
insulted, and as a man older than you, my ad- 
vice is to let the matter drop. Well then, on 
Friday after the review I shall expect you, 
Drubetsk6y. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince An- 
drew, and with a bow to them both he went 
out. 

Only when Prince Andrew was gone did 
Rost6v think of what he ought to have said. 
And he was still more angry at having omitted 
to say it. He ordered his horse at once and, 
coldly taking leave of Boris, rode home. Should 
he go to headquarters next day and challenge 
that affected adjutant, or really let the matter 
drop, was the question that worried him all 
the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he 
would have at seeing the fright of that small 
and frail but proud man when covered by his 
pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of 
all the men he knew there was none he would 



so much like to have for a friend as that very 
adjutant whom he so hated. 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE DAY AFTER Rost6v had been to see Boris, 
a review was held of the Austrian and Russian 
troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia 
and those who had been campaigning under 
Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the Russian with 
his heir the Tsardvich, and the Austrian with 
the Archduke, inspected the allied army of 
eighty thousand men. 

From early morning the smart clean troops 
were on the move, forming up on the field be- 
fore the fortress. Now thousands of feet and 
bayonets moved and halted at the officers' com- 
mand, turned with banners flying, formed up 
at intervals, and wheeled round other similar 
masses of infantry in different uniforms; now 
was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofs and the 
jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and 
green braided uniforms, with smartly dressed 
bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan, or 
gray horses; then again, spreading out with the 
brazen clatter of the polished shining cannon 
that quivered on the gun carriages and with 
the smell of linstocks, came the artillery which 
crawled between the infantry and cavalry and 
took up its appointed position. Not only the 
generals in full parade uniforms, with their 
thin or thick waists drawn in to the utmost, 
their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, 
and wearing scarves and all their decorations, 
not only the elegant, pomaded officers, but 
every soldier with his freshly washed and 
shaven face and his weapons clean and pol- 
ished to the utmost, and every horse groomed 
till its coat shone like satin and every hair of 
its wetted mane lay smooth felt that no small 
matter was happening, but an important and 
solemn affair. Every general and every soldier 
was conscious of his own insignificance, aware 
of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and 
yet at thesame time was conscious of his strength 
as a part of that enormous whole. 

From early morning strenuous activities and 
efforts had begun and by ten o'clock all had 
been brought into due order. The ranks were 
drown up on the vast field. The whole army 
was extended in three lines: the cavalry in 
front, behind it the artillery, and behind that 
again the infantry. 

A space like a street was left between each 
two lines of troops. The three parts of that 
army were sharply distinguished: Kutiizov's 
fighting army (with the Pdvlograds on the right 



136 



WAR AND PEACE 



flank of the front); those recently arrived from 
Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line; 
and the Austrian troops. But they all stood in 
the same lines, under one command, and in a 
like order. 

Like wind over leaves ran an excited 
whisper: "They're coming! They're com- 
ing!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a 
stir of final preparation swept over all the 
troops. 

From the direction of Olmiitz in front of 
them, a group was seen approaching. And at 
that moment, though the day was still, a light 
gust of wind blowing over the army slightly 
stirred the streamers on the lances and the un- 
folded standards fluttered against their staffs. 
It looked as if by that slight motion the army 
itself was expressing its joy at the approach of 
the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting: 
"Eyes front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks 
at sunrise, this was repeated by others from 
various sides and all became silent. 

In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of 
horses was heard. This was the Emperors' suites. 
The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the 
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played 
the general march. It seemed as though not the 
trumpeters were playing, but as if the army it- 
self, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had 
naturally burst into music. Amid these sounds, 
only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor 
Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words 
of greeting, and the first regiment roared "Hur- 
rah!" so deafeningly, continuously, and joy- 
fully that the men themselves were awed by 
their multitude and the immensity of the pow- 
er they constituted. 

Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutu- 
zov's army which the Tsar approached first, ex- 
perienced the same feeling as every other man 
in that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a 
proud consciousness of might, and a passion- 
ate attraction to him who was the cause of this 
triumph. 

He felt that at a single word from that man 
all this vast mass (and he himself an insignifi- 
cant atom in it) would go through fire and 
water, commit crime, die, or perform deeds of 
highest heroism, and so he could not but trem- 
ble and his heart stand still at the imminence 
of that word. 

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered 
from all sides, one regiment after another greet- 
ing the Tsar with the strains of the march, and 
then "Hurrah!" . . . Then the general march, 
and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growing ever 



stronger and fuller and merging into a deafen- 
ing roar. 

Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its 
silence and immobility seemed like a lifeless 
body, but as soon as he came up it became 
alive, its thunder joining the roar of the whole 
line along which he had already passed. 
Through the terrible and deafening roar of 
those voices, amid the square masses of troops 
standing motionless as if turned to stone, hun- 
dreds of riders composing the suites moved 
carelessly but symmetrically and above all free- 
ly, and in front of them two men the Emper- 
ors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passion- 
ate attention of that whole mass of men was 
concentrated. 

The handsome young Emperor Alexander, 
in the uniform of the Horse Guards, wearing 
a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, 
with his pleasant face and resonant though not 
loud voice, attracted everyone's attention. 

Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and 
with his keen sight had recognized the Tsar 
and watched his approach. When he was with- 
in twenty paces, and Nicholas could clearly 
distinguish every detail of his handsome, hap- 
py young face, he experienced a feeling of tend- 
erness and ecstasy such as he had never be- 
fore known. Every trait and every movement 
of the Tsar's seemed to him enchanting. 

Stopping in front of the Pdvlograds, the Tsar 
said something in French to the Austrian Em- 
peror and smiled. 

Seeing that smile, Rost6v involuntarily smiled 
himself and felt a still stronger flow of love 
for his sovereign. He longed to show that love 
in some way and knowing that this was impos- 
sible was ready to cry. The Tsar called the colo- 
nel of the regiment and said a few words to 
him. 

"Oh God, what would happen to me if the 
Emperor spoke to me?" thought Rost6v. "I 
should die of happiness!" 

The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank 
you all, gentlemen, I thank you with my whole 
heart." To Rost6v every word sounded like a 
voice from heaven. How gladly would he have 
died at once for his Tsar! 

"You have earned the St. George's standards 
and will be worthy of them." 

"Oh, to die, to die for him!" thought Rost6v. 

The Tsar said something more which Ros- 
t6v did not hear, and the soldiers, straining 
their lungs, shouted "Hurrah!" 

Rost6v too, bending over his saddle, shouted 
"Hurrah!" with all his might, feeling that he 



BOOK 

would like to injure himself by that shout, if 
only to express his rapture fully. 

The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of 
the hussars as if undecided. 

"How can the Emperor be undecided?" 
thought Rost6v, but then even this indecision 
appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like 
everything else the Tsar did. 

That hesitation lasted only an instant. The 
Tsar's foot, in the narrow pointed boot then 
fashionable, touched the groin of the bobtailed 
bay mare he rode, his hand in a white glove 
gathered up the reins, and he moved off accom- 
panied by an irregularly swaying sea of aides- 
de-camp. Farther and farther he rode away, 
stopping at other regiments, till at last only 
his white plumes were visible to Rost6v from 
amid the suites that surrounded the Emperors. 

Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rost6v 
noticed Bolk6nski, sitting his horse indolently 
and carelessly. Rost6v recalled their quarrel of 
yesterday and the question presented itself 
whether he ought or ought not to challenge 
Bolk6nski. "Of course not!" he now thought. 
"Is it worth thinking or speaking of it at such 
a moment? At a time of such love, such rap- 
ture, and such self-sacrifice, what do any of our 
quarrels and affronts matter? I love and for- 
give everybody now." 

When the Emperor had passed nearly all 
the regiments, the troops began a ceremonial 
march past him, and Rost6v on Bedouin, re- 
cently purchased from Denfsov, rode past too, 
at the rear of his squadron that is, alone and 
in full view of the Emperor. 

Before he reached him, Rost6v, who was a 
splendid horseman, spurred Bedouin twice 
and successfully put him to the showy trot in 
which the animal went when excited. Bend- 
ing his foaming muzzle to his chest, his tail ex- 
tended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the 
Emperor's eye upon him, passed splendidly, 
lifting his feet with a high and graceful action, 
as if flying through the air without touching 
the ground. 

Rost6v himself, his legs well back and his 
stomach drawn in and feeling himself one with 
his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frown- 
ing but blissful face "like a vewy devil," as 
Denfsov expressed it. 

"Fine fellows, the Pdvlogradsl" remarked 
the Emperor. 

"My God, how happy I should be if he or- 
dered me to leap into the fire this instant!" 
thought Rost6v. 

When the review was over, the newly ar- 



THREE 137 

rived officers, and also Kuttizov's, collected in 
groups and began to talk about the awards, 
about the Austrians and their uniforms, about 
their lines, about Bonaparte, and how badly 
the latter would fare now, especially if the Es- 
sen corps arrived and Prussia took our side. 

But the talk in every group was chiefly about 
the Emperor Alexander. His every word and 
movement was described with ecstasy. 

They all had but one wish: to advance as 
soon as possible against the enemy under the 
Emperor's command. Commanded by the Em- 
peror himself they could not fail to vanquish 
anyone, be it whom it might: so thought Ros- 
tov and most of the officers after the review. 

All were then more confident of victory than 
the winning of two battles would have made 
them. 

CHAPTER IX 

THE DAY AFTER the review, Boris, in his best 
uniform and with his comrade Berg's best 
wishes for success, rode to Olmiitz to see Bol- 
konski, wishing to profit by his friendliness and 
obtain for himself the best post he could pref- 
erably that of adjutant to some important 
personage, a position in the army which seemed 
to him most attractive. "It is all very well for 
Rost6v, whose father sends him ten thousand 
rubles at a time, to talk about not wishing to 
cringe to anybody and not be anyone's lackey, 
but I who have nothing but my brains have to 
make a career and must not miss opportunities, 
but must avail myself of them!" he reflected. 

He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmiitz 
that day, but the appearance of the town where 
the headquarters and the diplomatic corps 
were stationed and the two Emperors were 
living with their suites, households, and courts 
only strengthened his desire to belong to that 
higher world. 

He knew no one, and despite his smart 
Guardsman's uniform, all these exalted per- 
sonages passing in the streets in their elegant 
carriages with their plumes, ribbons, and med- 
als, both courtiers and military men, seemed 
so immeasurably above him, an insignificant 
officer of the Guards, that they not only did 
not wish to, but simply could not, be aware of 
his existence. At the quarters of the command- 
er in chief, Kutiizov, where he inquired for 
Bolk6nski, all the adjutants and even the or- 
derlies looked at him as if they wished to im- 
press on him that a great many officers like 
him were always coming there and that every- 
body was heartily sick of them. In spite of this, 



138 



WAR AND PEACE 



or rather because of it, next day, November 15, 
after dinner he again went to Olmiitz and, en- 
tering the house occupied by Kutiizov, asked 
for Bolk6nski. Prince Andrew was in and Boris 
was shown into a large hall probably formerly 
used for dancing, but in which five beds now 
stood, and furniture of various kinds: a table, 
chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, near- 
est the door, was sitting at the table in a Per- 
sian dressing gown, writing. Another, the red, 
stout Nesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms un- 
der his head, laughing with an officer who had 
sat down beside him. A third was playing a Vi- 
ennese waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, 
lying on the clavichord, sang the tune. Bol- 
k6nski was not there. None of these gentlemen 
changed his position on seeing Boris. The one 
who was writing and whom Boris addressed 
turned round crossly and told him Bolk6nski 
was on duty and that he should go through the 
door on the left into the reception room if he 
wished to see him. Boris thanked him and went 
to the reception room, where he found some 
ten officers and generals. 

When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes 
drooping contemptuously (with that peculiar 
expression of polite weariness which plainly 
says, "If it were not my duty I would not talk 
to you for a moment"), was listening to an old 
Russian general with decorations, who stood 
very erect, almost on tiptoe, with a soldier's 
obsequious expression on his purple face, re- 
porting something. 

"Very well, then, be so good as to wait," said 
Prince Andrew to the general, in Russian, 
speaking with the French intonation he affect- 
ed when he wished to speak contemptuously, 
and noticing Boris, Prince Andrew, paying no 
more heed to the general who ran after him 
imploring him to hear something more, nod- 
ded and turned to him with a cheerful smile. 

At that moment Boris clearly realized what 
he had before surmised, that in the army, be- 
sides the subordination and discipline pre- 
scribed in the military code, which he and the 
others knew in the regiment, there was another, 
more important, subordination, which made 
this tight-laced, purple-faced general wait re- 
spectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for his 
own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant 
Drubetsk6y. More than ever was Boris re- 
solved to serve in future not according to the 
written code, but under this unwritten law. 
He felt now that merely by having been rec- 
ommended to Prince Andrew he had already 
risen above the general who at the front had 



the power to annihilate him, a lieutenant of 
the Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him 
and took his hand. 

"I am very sorry you did not find me in yes- 
terday. I was fussing about with Germans all 
day. We went with Weyrother to survey the 
dispositions. When Germans start being ac- 
curate, there's no end to it I" 

Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince 
Andrew was alluding to as something general- 
ly known. But it was the first time he had heard 
Weyrother's name, or even the term "disposi- 
tions." 

"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to 
be an adjutant? I have been thinking about 
you." 

"Yes, I was thinking" for some reason Boris 
could not help blushing "of asking the com- 
mander in chief. He has had a letter from 
Prince Kurdgin about me. I only wanted to 
ask because I fear the Guards won't be in ac- 
tion," he added as if in apology. 

"All right, all right. We'll talk it over," re- 
plied Prince Andrew. "Only let me report this 
gentleman's business, and I shall be at your 
disposal." 

While Prince Andrew went to report about 
the purple-faced general, that gentleman evi- 
dently not sharing Boris' conception of the ad- 
vantages of the unwritten code of subordina- 
tionlooked so fixedly at the presumptuous 
lieutenant who had prevented his finishing 
what he had to say to the adjutant that Boris 
felt uncomfortable. He turned away and waited 
impatiently for Prince Andrew's return from 
the commander in chief's room. 

"You see, my dear fellow, I have been think- 
ing about you," said Prince Andrew when they 
had gone into the large room where the clavi- 
chord was. "It's no use your going to the com- 
mander in chief. He would say a lot of pleas- 
ant things, ask you to dinner" ("That would 
not be bad as regards the unwritten code," 
thought Boris), "but nothing more would come 
of it. There will soon be a battalion of us aides- 
de-camp and adjutants! But this is what we'll 
do: I have a good friend, an adjutant general 
and an excellent fellow, Prince Dolgorukov; 
and though you may not know it, the fact is 
that now Kutiizov with his staff and all of us 
count for nothing. Everything is now centered 
round the Emperor. So we will go to Dolgoru- 
kov; I have to go there anyhow and I have al- 
ready spoken to him about you. We shall see 
whether he cannot attach you to himself or 
find a place for you somewhere nearer the sun." 



Prince Andrew always became specially keen 
when he had to guide a young man and help 
him to worldly success. Under cover of obtain- 
ing help of this kind for another, which from 
pride he would never accept for himself, he 
kept in touch with the circle which confers suc- 
cess and which attracted him. He very readily 
took up Boris' cause and went with him to Dol- 
goriikov. 

It was late in the evening when they entered 
the palace at Olmiitz occupied by the Emper- 
ors and their retinues. 

That same day a council of war had been 
held in which all the members of the Hof- 
kriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At 
that council, contrary to the views of the old 
generals Kutiizov and Prince Schwartzenberg, 
it had been decided to advance immediately 
and give battle to Bonaparte. The council of 
war was just over when Prince Andrew accom- 
panied by Boris arrived at the palace to find 
Dolgorukov. Everyone at headquarters was still 
under the spell of the day's council, at which 
the party of the young had triumphed. The 
voices of those who counseled delay and ad- 
vised waiting for something else before advanc- 
ing had been so completely silenced and their 
arguments confuted by such conclusive evi- 
dence of the advantages of attacking that what 
had been discussed at the council the coming 
battle and the victory that would certainly re- 
sult from it no longer seemed to be in the 
future but in the past. All the advantages were 
on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubted- 
ly superior to Napoleon's, were concentrated 
in one place, the troops inspired by the Em- 
perors' presence were eager for action. The 
strategic position where the operations would 
take place was familiar in all its details to the 
Austrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident 
had ordained that the Austrian army should 
maneuver the previous year on the very fields 
where the French had now to be fought; the 
adjacent locality was known and shown in 
every detail on the maps, and Bonaparte, evi- 
dently weakened, was undertaking nothing. 

Dolgorukov, one of the warmest advocates 
of an attack, had just returned from the coun- 
cil, tired and exhausted but eager and proud 
of the victory that had been gained. Prince 
Andrew introduced his prot^g^, but Prince 
Dolgonikov politely and firmly pressing his 
hand said nothing to Boris and, evidently un- 
able to suppress the thoughts which were up- 
permost in his mind at that moment, addressed 
Prince Andrew in French, 



BOOK THREE 139 

"Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have 



gained! God grant that the one that will result 
from it will be as victorious! However, my dear 
fellow," he said abruptly and eagerly, "I must 
confess to having been unjust to the Austrians 
and especially to Weyrother. What exactitude, 
what minuteness, what knowledge of the local- 
ity, what foresight for every eventuality, every 
possibility even to the smallest detail 1 No, my 
dear fellow, no conditions better than our pres- 
ent ones could have been devised. This combi- 
nation of Austrian precision with Russian val- 
orwhat more could be wished for?" 

"So the attack is definitely resolved on?" 
asked Bolk6nski. 

"And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems 
to me that Bonaparte has decidedly lost his 
bearings, you know that a letter was received 
from him today for the Emperor." Dolgorukov 
smiled significantly. 

"Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired 
Bolkonski. 

"What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on 
. . . merely to gain time. I tell you he is in our 
hands, that's certain! But what was most amus- 
ing," he continued, with a sudden, good-na- 
tured laugh, "was that we could not think how 
to address the reply! If not as 'Consul' and of 
course not as 'Emperor,' it seemed to me it 
should be to 'General Bonaparte.' " 

"But between not recognizing him as Em- 
peror and calling him General Bonaparte, 
there is a difference," remarked Bolk6nski. 

"That's just it," interrupted Dolgoriikov 
quickly, laughing. "You know Bilfbin he's a 
very clever fellow. He suggested addressing 
him as 'Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.' " 

Dolgorukov laughed merrily. 

"Only that?" said Bolk6nski. 

"All the same, it was Bilibin who found a 
suitable form for the address. He is a wise and 
clever fellow." 

"What was it?" 

"To the Head of the French Government 
. . . Au chef du gouvernement franfais," said 
Dolgorukov, with grave satisfaction. "Good, 
wasn't it?" 

"Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said 
Bolk6nski. 

"Oh yes, very much! My brother knows him, 
he's dined with him the present Emperor- 
more than once in Paris, and tells me he never 
met a more cunning or subtle diplomatist 
you know, a combination of French adroitness 
and Italian play-acting! Do you know the tale 
about him and Count Mark6v? Count Mark6v 



140 



WAR AND PEACE 



was the only man who knew how to handle 
him. You know the story of the handkerchief? 
It is delightful!" 

And the talkative Dolgorukov, turning now 
to Boris, now to Prince Andrew, told how 
Bonaparte wishing to test Mark6v, our ambas- 
sador, purposely dropped a handkerchief in 
front of him and stood looking at Mark6v, 
probably expecting Mark6v to pick it up for 
him, and how Mark6v immediately dropped 
his own beside it and picked it up without 
touching Bonaparte's. 

"Delightful!" said Bolk6nski. "But I have 
come to you, Prince, as a petitioner on behalf 
of this young man. You see . . ." but before 
Prince Andrew could finish, an aide-de-camp 
came in to summon Dolgorukov to the Emper- 
or. 

"Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolgorukov, 
getting up hurriedly and pressing the hands of 
Prince Andrew and Boris. "You know I should 
be very glad to do all in my power both for you 
and for this dear young man." Again he pressed 
the hand of the latter with an expression of 
good-natured, sincere, and animated levity. 
"But you see . . . another time!" 

Boris was excited by the thought of being so 
close to the higher powers as he felt himself to 
be at that moment. He was conscious that here 
he was in contact with the springs that set in 
motion the enormous movements of the mass 
of which in his regiment he felt himself a tiny, 
obedient, and insignificant atom. They fol- 
lowed Prince Dolgorukov out into the corri- 
dor and met coming out of the door of the 
Emperor's room by which Dolgoriikov had en- 
tereda short man in civilian clothes with a 
clever face and sharply projecting jaw which, 
without spoiling his face, gave him a peculiar 
vivacity and shiftiness of expression. This short 
man nodded to Dolgorukov as to an intimate 
friend and stared at Prince Andrew with cool 
intensity, walking straight toward him and 
evidently expecting him to bow or to step out 
of his way. Prince Andrew did neither: a look 
of animosity appeared on his face and the oth- 
er turned away and went down the side of the 
corridor. 

"Who was that?" asked Boris. 

"He is one of the most remarkable, but to 
me most unpleasant of men the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski. . . . 
It is such men as he who decide the fate of 
nations," added Bolk6nski with a sigh he 
could not suppress, as they passed out of the 
palace. 



Next day, the army began its campaign, and 
up to tl\e very battle of Austerlitz, Boris was 
unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dol- 
goriikov again and remained for a while with 
the Ismdylov regiment. 

CHAPTER X 

AT DAWN on the sixteenth of November, Denf- 
sov's squadron, in which Nicholas Rost6v served 
and which was in Prince Bagrati6n's detach- 
ment, moved from the place where it had 
spent the night, advancing into action as ar- 
ranged, and after going behind other columns 
for about two thirds of a mile was stopped on 
the highroad. Rost6v saw the Cossacks and 
then the first and second squadrons of hussars 
and infantry battalions and artillery pass by 
and go forward and then Generals Bagrati6n 
and Dolgorukov ride past with their adjutants. 
All the fear before action which he had experi- 
enced as previously, all the inner struggle to 
conquer that fear, all his dreams of distin- 
guishing himself as a true hussar in this battle, 
had been wasted. Their squadron remained in 
reserve and Nicholas Rost6v spent that day in 
a dull and wretched mood. At nine in the morn- 
ing, he heard firing in front and shouts of hur- 
rah, and saw wounded being brought back 
(there were not many of them), and at last he 
saw how a whole detachment of French caval- 
ry was brought in, convoyed by a sdtnya of 
Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and, 
though not big, had been a successful engage- 
ment. The men and officers returning spoke 
of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the 
town of Wischau and the capture of a whole 
French squadron. The day was bright and sun- 
ny after a sharp night frost, and the cheerful 
glitter of that autumn day was in keeping with 
the news of victory which was conveyed, not 
only by the tales of those who had taken part 
in it, but also by the joyful expression on the 
faces of soldiers, officers, generals, and adju- 
tants, as they passed Rostov going or coming. 
And Nicholas, who had vainly suffered all the 
dread that precedes a battle and had spent 
that happy day in inactivity, was all the more 
depressed. 

"Come here, Wost6v. Let's dwink to dwown 
our gwief!" shouted Denisov, who had settled 
down by the roadside with a flask and some 
food. 

The officers gathered round Denfsov's can- 
teen, eating and talking. 

"There! They are bringing another!" cried 
one of the officers, indicating a captive French 



BOOK THREE 



141 



dragoon who was being brought in on foot by 
two Cossacks. 

One of them was leading by the bridle a fine 
large French horse he had taken from the pris- 
oner. 

"Sell us that horse!" Denfsov called out to 
the Cossacks. 

"If you like, your honor!" 

The officers got up and stood round the Cos- 
sacks and their prisoner. The French dragoon 
was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a 
German accent. He was breathless with agita- 
tion, his face was red, and when he heard some 
French spoken he at once began speaking to 
the officers, addressing first one, then another. 
He said he would not have been taken, it was 
not his fault but the corporal's who had sent 
him to seize some horsecloths, though he had 
told him the Russians were there. And at every 
word he added: "But don't hurt my little 
horse!" and stroked the animal. It was plain 
that he did not quite grasp where he was. Now 
he excused himself for having been taken pris- 
oner and now, imagining himself before his 
own officers, insisted on his soldierly discipline 
and zeal in the service. He brought with him 
into our rearguard all the freshness of atmos- 
phere of the French army, which was so alien 
to us. 

The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold 
pieces, and Rost6v, being the richest of the of- 
ficers now that he had received his money, 
bought it. 

"But don't hurt my little horse!" said the 
Alsatian good-naturedly to Rost6v when the 
animal was handed over to the hussar. 

Rost6v smilingly reassured the dragoon and 
gave him money. 

"Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touching 
the prisoner's arm to make him go on. 

"The Emperor! The Emperor!" was sud- 
denly heard among the hussars. 

All began to run and bustle, and Rost6v saw 
coming up the road behind him several riders 
with white plumes in their hats. In a moment 
everyone was in his place, waiting. 

Rost6v did not know or remember how he 
ran to his place and mounted. Instantly his re- 
gret at not having been in action and his de- 
jected mood amid people of whom he was 
weary had gone, instantly every thought of 
himself had vanished. He was filled with hap- 
piness at his nearness to the Emperor. He felt 
that this nearness by itself made up to him for 
the day he had lost. He was happy as a lover 
when the longed-for moment of meeting ar- 



rives. Not daring to look round and without 
looking round, he was ecstatically conscious 
of his approach. He felt it not only from the 
sound of the hoofs of the approaching caval- 
cade, but because as he drew near everything 
grew brighter, more joyful, more significant, 
and more festive around him. Nearer and near- 
er to Rost6v came that sun shedding beams of 
mild and majestic light around, and already 
he felt himself enveloped in those beams, he 
heard his voice, that kindly, calm, and majestic 
voice that was yet so simple! And as if in ac- 
cord with Rostov's feeling, there was a deathly 
stillness amid which was heard the Emperor's 
voice. 

"The Pavlograd hussars?" he inquired. 

"The reserves, sire!" replied a voice, a very 
human one compared to that which had said: 
"The Pdvlograd hussars?" 

The Emperor drew level with Rostov and 
halted. Alexander's face was even more beau- 
tiful than it had been three days before at the 
review. It shone with such gaiety and youth, 
such innocent youth, that it suggested the live- 
liness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was 
the face of the majestic Emperor. Casually, 
while surveying the squadron, the Emperor's 
eyes met Rostov's and rested on them for not 
more than two seconds. Whether or no the 
Emperor understood what was going on in 
Rostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he un- 
derstood everything), at any rate his light-blue 
eyes gazed for about two seconds into Rost6v's 
face. A gentle, mild light poured from them. 
Then all at once he raised his eyebrows, ab- 
ruptly touched his horse with his left foot, and 
galloped on. 

The younger Emperor could not restrain his 
wish to be present at the battle and, in spite 
of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelve 
o'clock left the third column with which he 
had been and galloped toward the vanguard. 
Before he came up with the hussars, several 
adjutants met him with news of the successful 
result of the action. 

This battle, which consisted in the capture 
of a French squadron, was represented as a 
brilliant victory over the French, and so the 
Emperor and the whole army, especially while 
the smoke hung over the battlefield, believed 
that the French had been defeated and were 
retreating against their will. A few minutes 
after the Emperor had passed, the Pavlograd 
division was ordered to advance. In Wischau 
itself, a petty German town, Rostov saw the 
Emperor again. In the market place, where 



142 



WAR AND PEACE 



there had been some rather heavy firing before 
the Emperor's arrival, lay several killed and 
wounded soldiers whom there had not been 
time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by 
his suite of officers and courtiers, was riding a 
bobtailed chestnut mare, a different one from 
that which he had ridden at the review, and 
bending to one side he gracefully held a gold 
lorgnette to his eyes and looked at a soldier 
who lay prone, with blood on his uncovered 
head. The wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, 
and revolting that his proximity to the Emper- 
or shocked Rostov. Rost6v saw how the Em- 
peror's rather round shoulders shuddered as 
if a cold shiver had run down them, how his 
left foot began convulsively tapping the horse's 
side with the spur, and how the well-trained 
horse looked round unconcerned and did not 
stir. An adjutant, dismounting, lifted the sol- 
dier under the arms to place him on a stretch- 
er that had been brought. The soldier groaned. 

"Gently, gentlyl Can't you do it more gent- 
ly?" said the Emperor apparently suffering 
more than the dying soldier, and he rode away. 

Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor's eyes 
and heard him, as he was riding away, say to 
Czartoryski: "What a terrible thing war is: 
what a terrible thing! Quelle terrible chose 
que la guerre!" 

The troops of the vanguard were stationed 
before Wischau, within sight of the enemy's 
lines, which all day long had yielded ground to 
us at the least firing. The Emperor's gratitude 
was announced to the vanguard, rewards were 
promised, and the men received a double ra- 
tion of vodka. The campfires crackled and the 
soldiers' songs resounded even more merrily 
than on theprevious night. Denisov celebrated 
his promotion to the rank of major, and Ros- 
t6v, who had already drunk enough, at the end 
of the feast proposed the Emperor's health. 
"Not 'our Sovereign, the Emperor,' as they say 
at official dinners," said he, "but the health of 
our Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and great 
man! Let us drink to his health and to the cer- 
tain defeat of the French! 

"If we fought before," he said, "not letting 
the French pass, as at Schon Grabern, what 
shall we not do now when he is at the front? 
We will all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gen- 
tlemen? Perhaps I am not saying it right, I 
have drunk a good dealbut that is how I feel, 
and so do you too! To the health of Alexander 
the First! Hurrah!" 

"Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic voices of 
the officers. 



And the old cavalry captain, Kfrsten, shouted 
enthusiastically and no less sincerely than the 
twenty-year-old Rost6v. 

When the officers had emptied and smashed 
their glasses, Kirsten filled others and, in shirt 
sleeves and breeches, went glass in hand to the 
soldiers' bonfires and with his long gray mus- 
tache, his white chest showing under his open 
shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in the light of 
the campfire, waving his uplifted arm. 

"Lads! here's to our Sovereign, the Emper- 
or, and victory over our enemies! Hurrah!" he 
exclaimed in his dashing, old, hussar's bari- 
tone. 

The hussars crowded round and responded 
heartily with loud shouts. 

Late that night, when all had separated, 
Denfsov with his short hand patted his favor- 
ite, Rost6v, on the shoulder. 

"As there's no one to fall in love with on 
campaign, he's fallen in love with the Tsar," 
he said. 

"Denisov, don't make fun of it!" cried Ros- 
t6v. "It is such a lofty, beautiful feeling, such 



"I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share 
and appwove. . . ." 

"No, you don't understand!" 

And Rostov got up and went wandering 
among the campfires, dreaming of what happi- 
ness it would be to die not in saving the Em- 
peror's life (he did not even dare to dream of 
that), but simply to die before his eyes. He 
really was in love with the Tsar and the glory 
of the Russian arms and the hope of future 
triumph. And he was not the only man to ex- 
perience that feeling during those memorable 
days preceding the battle of Austcrlitz: nine 
tenths of the men in the Russian army were 
then in love, though less ecstatically, with their 
Tsar and the glory of the Russian arms. 

CHAPTER XI 

THE NEXT DAY the Emperor stopped at Wis- 
chau, and Villier, his physician, was repeated- 
ly summoned to see him. At headquarters and 
among the troops near by the news spread that 
the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothing and 
had slept badly that night, those around him 
reported. The cause of this indisposition was 
the strong impression made on his sensitive 
mind by the sight of the killed and wounded. 
At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French 
officer who had come with a flag of truce, de- 
manding an audience with the Russian Em- 
peror, was brought into Wischau from our out- 



BOOK THREE 



143 



posts. This officer was Savary. The Emperor 
had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had 
to wait. At midday he was admitted to the Em- 
peror, and an hour later he rode off with Prince 
Dolgoriikovtothe advanced post of the French 
army. 

It was rumored that Savary had been sent to 
propose to Alexander a meeting with Napo- 
leon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, 
a personal interview was refused, and instead 
of the Sovereign, Prince Dolgorukov, the vic- 
tor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negoti- 
ate with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, 
these negotiations were actuated by a real de- 
sire for peace. 

Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, 
went straight to the Tsar, and remained alone 
with him for a long time. 

On the eighteenth and nineteenth of No- 
vember, the army advanced two days' march 
and the enemy's outposts after a brief inter- 
change of shots retreated. In the highest army 
circles from midday on the nineteenth, a great, 
excitedly bustling activity began whLh lasted 
till the morning of the twentieth, when the 
memorable battle of Austerlitz was fought. 

Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity 
the eager talk, running to and fro, and dis- 
patching of adjutants was con fined to the Em- 
peror's headquarters. But on the afternoon of 
that day, this activity reached Kutiizov's head- 
quarters and the staffs of the commanders of 
columns. By evening, the adjutants had spread 
it to all ends and parts of the army, and in the 
night from the nineteenth to the twentieth, 
the whole eighty thousand allied troops rose 
from their bivouacs to the hum of voices, and 
the army swayed and started in one enormous 
mass six miles long. 

The concentrated activity which had begun 
at the Emperor's headquarters in the morning 
and had started the whole movement that fol- 
lowed was like the first movement of the main 
wheel of a large tower clock. One wheel slow- 
ly moved, another was set in motion, and a 
third, and wheels began to revolve faster and 
faster, levers and cogwheels to work, chimes to 
play, figures to pop out, and the hands to ad- 
vance with regular motion as a result of all 
that activity. 

Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in 
the mechanism of the military machine, an im- 
pulse once given leads to the final result; and 
just as indifferently quiescent till the moment 
when motion is transmitted to them are the 
parts of the mechanism which the impulse has 



not yet reached. Wheels creak on their axles as 
the cogs engage one another and the revolving 
pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their move- 
ment, but a neighboring wheel is as quiet and 
motionless as though it were prepared to re- 
main so for a hundred years; but the moment 
comes when the lever catches it and obeying 
the impulse that wheel begins to creak and 
joins in the common motion the result and 
aim of which are beyond its ken. 

Just as in a clock, the result of the compli- 
cated motion of innumerable wheels and pul- 
leys is merely a slow and regular movement of 
the hands which show the time, so the result 
of all the complicated human activities of 
1 60,000 Russians and French all their passions, 
desires, remorse, humiliations, sufferings, out- 
bursts of pride, fear, and enthusiasm was only 
the loss of the battle of Austerlitz, the so-called 
battle of the three Emperors that is to say, a 
slow movement of the hand on the dial of hu- 
man history. 

Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in 
constant attendance on the commander in 
chief. 

At six in the evening, Kutiizov went to the 
Emperor's headquarters and after staying but 
a short time with the Tsar went to see the grand 
marshal of the court, Count Tolst6y. 

Bolk6nski took the opportunity to go in to 
get some details of the coming action from 
Dolgorukov. He felt that Kutiizov was upset 
and dissatisfied about something and that at 
headquarters they were dissatisfied with him, 
and also that at the Emperor's headquarters 
everyone adopted toward him the tone of men 
who know something others do not know: he 
therefore wished to speak to Dolgorukov. 

"Well, how d'you do, my dear fellow?" said 
Dolgorukov, who was sitting at tea with Bili- 
bin. "The fete is for tomorrow. How is your 
old fellow? Out of sorts?" 

"I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he 
would like to be heard." 

"But they heard him at the council of war 
and will hear him when he talks sense, but to 
temporize and wait for something now when 
Bonaparte fears nothing so much as a general 
battle is impossible." 

"Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince An- 
drew. "Well, what is Bonaparte like? How did 
he impress you?" 

"Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he 
fears nothing so much as a general engage- 
ment," repeated Dolgonikov, evidently priz- 
ing this general conclusion which he had ar- 



144 



WAR AND PEACE 



rived at from his interview with Napoleon. "If 
he weren't afraid of a battle why did he ask for 
that interview? Why negotiate, and above all 
why retreat, when to retreat is so contrary to 
his method of conducting war? Believe me, he 
is afraid, afraid of a general battle. His hour 
has come! Mark my words I" 

"But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince 
Andrew again. 

"He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxi- 
ous that I should call him 'Your Majesty/ but 
who, to his chagrin, got no title frommel That's 
the sort of man he is, and nothing more," re- 
plied Dolgoriikov, looking round at Bilibin 
with a smile. 

"Despite my great respect for old Kutiizov," 
he continued, "we should be a nice set of fel- 
lows if we were to wait about and so give him 
a chance to escape, or to trick us, now that we 
certainly have him in our hands! No, we 
mustn't forget Suv6rov and his rule not to 
put yourself in a position to be attacked, but 
yourself to attack. Believe me in war the en- 
ergy of young men often shows the way better 
than all the experience of old Cunctators." 

"But in what position are we going to at- 
tack him? I have been at the outposts today 
and it is impossible to say where his chief 
forces are situated," said Prince Andrew. 

He wished to explain to Dolgoriikov a plan 
of attack he had himself formed. 

"Oh, that is all the same," Dolgoriikov said 
quickly, and getting up he spread a map on 
the table. "All eventualities have been fore- 
seen. If he is standing before Brunn . . ." 

And Prince Dolgoriikov rapidly but indis- 
tinctly explained Weyrother's plan of a flank- 
ing movement. 

Prince Andrew began to reply and to state 
his own plan, which might have been as good 
as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantage that 
Weyrother's had already been approved. As 
soon as Prince Andrew began to demonstrate 
the defects of the latter and the merits of his 
own plan, Prince Dolgoriikov ceased to listen 
to him and gazed absent-mindedly not at the 
map, but at Prince Andrew's face. 

"There will be a council of war at Kutiizov's 
tonight, though; you can say all this there," re- 
marked Dolgorukov. 

"I will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving 
away from the map. 

"Whatever are you bothering about, gentle- 
men?" said Bilibin, who, till then, had listened 
with an amused smile to their conversation 
and now was evidently ready with a joke. 



"Whether tomorrow brings victory or defeat, 
the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except 
your Kutiizov, there is not a single Russian in 
command of a column! The commanders are: 
Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langer- 
on, le Prince de Lichtenstein, le Prince de Ho- 
henlohe, and finally Prishprish, 1 and so on like 
all those Polish names." 

"Be quiet, backbiter!" said Dolgoriikov. "It 
is not true; there are now two Russians, Milo- 
rddovich, and Dokhtiirov, and there would be 
a third, Count Arakchev, if his nerves were 
not too weak." 

"However, I think General Kutiizov has 
come out," said Prince Andrew. "I wish you 
good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added 
and went out after shaking hands with Dol- 
gorukov and Bilibin. 

On the way home, Prince Andrew could not 
refrain from asking Kutiizov, who was sitting 
silently beside him, what he thought of tomor- 
row's battle. 

Kutiizov looked sternly at his adjutant and, 
after a pause, replied: "I think the battle will 
be lost, and so I told Count Tolst6y and asked 
him to tell the Emperor. What do you think 
he replied? 'But, my dear general, I am en- 
gaged with rice and cutlets, look after military 
matters yourself!' Yes . . . That was the answer 
I got!" 

CHAPTER XII 

SHORTLY AFTER nine o'clock that evening, Wey- 
rother drove with his plans to Kutiizov's quar- 
ters where the council of war was to be held. 
All the commanders of columns were sum- 
moned to the commander in chief's and with 
the exception of Prince Bagrati6n, who de- 
clined to come, were all there at the appointed 
time. 

Weyrother, who was in full control of the 
proposed battle, by his eagerness and briskness 
presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied 
and drowsy Kutiizov, who reluctantly played 
the part of chairman and president of the 
council of war. Weyrother evidently felt him- 
self to be at the head of a movement that had 
already become unrestrainable. He was like a 
horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy 
cart. Whether he was pulling it or beingpushed 
by it he did not know, but rushed along at 
headlong speed with no time to consider what 
this movement might lead to. Weyrother had 
been twice that evening to the enemy's picket 
line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to the 

1 General Przebysz^wski. TR. 



BOOK THREE 



Emperors, Russian and Austrian, to report 
and explain, and to his headquarters where he 
had dictated the dispositions in German, and 
now, much exhausted, he arrived at Kutiizov's. 

He was evidently so busy that he even for- 
got to be polite to the commander in chief. He 
interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinct- 
ly, without looking at the man he was address- 
ing, and did not reply to questions put to him. 
He was bespattered with mud and had a piti- 
ful, weary, and distracted air, though at the 
same time he was haughty and self-confident. 

Kutiizov was occupying a nobleman's castle 
of modest dimensions near Ostralitz. In the 
large drawing room which had become the 
commander in chief's office were gathered Ku- 
tiizov himself, Weyrother, and the members of 
the council of war. They were drinking tea, 
and only awaited Prince Bagrati6n to begin 
the council. At last Bagrati6n's orderly came 
with the news that the prince could not at- 
tend. Prince Andrew came in to inform the 
commander in chief of this and, availing him- 
self of permission previously given him by Ku- 
tiizov to be present at the council, he remained 
in the room. 

"Since Prince Bagration is not coming, we 
may begin," said Weyrother, hurriedly rising 
from his seat and going up to the table on 
which an enormous map of the environs of 
Briinn was spread out. 

Kutiizov, with his uniform unbuttoned so 
that his fat neck bulged over his collar as if es- 
caping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chair, 
with his podgy old hands resting symmetri- 
cally on its arms. At the sound of Weyrother's 
voice, he opened his one eye with an effort. 

"Yes, yes, if you please 1 It is already late," 
said he, and nodding his head he let it droop 
and again closed his eye. 

If at first the members of the council thought 
that Kutiizov was pretending to sleep, the 
sounds his nose emitted during the reading 
that followed proved that the commander in 
chief at that moment was absorbed by a far 
more serious matter than a desire to show his 
contempt for the dispositions or anything else 
he was engaged in satisfying the irresistible 
human need for sleep. He really was asleep. 
Weyrother, with the gesture of a man too busy 
to lose a moment, glanced at Kutiizov and, 
having convinced himself that he was asleep, 
took up a paper and in a loud, monotonous 
voice began to read out the dispositions for 
the impending battle, under a heading which 
he also read out: 



"Dispositions for an attack on the enemy 
position behind Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz, No- 
vember 30, 1805." 

The dispositions were very complicated and 
difficult. They began as follows: 

"As the enemy's left wing rests on wooded 
hills and his right extends along Kobelnitz 
and Sokolnitz behind the pondsuhat are there, 
while we, on the other hand, with our left wing 
by far outflank his right, it is advantageous to 
attack the enemy's latter wing especially if we 
occupy the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, 
whereby we can both fall on his flank and pur- 
sue him over the plain between Schlappanitz 
and the Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles 
of Schlappanitz and Bellowitz which cover the 
enemy's front. For this object it is necessary 
that . . . The first column inarches . . . The 
second column marches . . . The third column 
marches . . ." and so on, read Weyrother. 

The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to 
the difficult dispositions. The tall, fair-haired 
General Buxhowden stood, leaning his back 
against the wall, his eyes fixed on a burning 
candle, and seemed not to listen or even to 
wish to be thought to listen. Exactly opposite 
Weyrother, with his glistening wide-open eyes 
fixed upon him and his mustache twisted up- 
wards, sat the ruddy Milorddovich in a mili- 
tary pose, his elbows turned outwards, his 
hands on his knees, and his shoulders raised. 
He remained stubbornly silent, gazing at Wey- 
rother's face, and only turned away his eyes 
when the Austrian chief of staff finished read- 
ing. Then Milorddovich looked round signifi- 
cantly at the other generals. But one could not 
tell from that significant look whether he 
agreed or disagreed and was satisfied or not with 
the arrangements. Next to Weyrother sat Count 
Langeron who, with a subtle smile that never 
left his typically southern French face during 
the whole time of the reading, gazed at his deli- 
cate fingers which rapidly twirled by its cor- 
ners a gold snuffbox on which was a portrait. 
In the middle of one of the longest sentences, 
he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, 
raised his head, and with inimical politeness 
lurking in the corners of his thin lips inter- 
rupted Weyrother, wishing to say something. 
But the Austrian general, continuing to read, 
frowned angrily and jerked his elbows, as if to 
say: "You can tell me your views later, but now 
be so good as to look at the map and listen." 
Langeron lifted his eyes with an expression of 
perplexity, turned round to Milorddovich as 
if seeking an explanation, but meeting the lat- 



146 



WAR AND PEACE 



ter's impressive but meaningless gaze drooped 
his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his 
snuffbox. 

"A geography lesson I " he muttered as if to 
himself, but loud enough to be heard. 

Przebysz^wski, with respectful but dignified 
politeness, held his hand to his ear toward 
Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in 
attention. Dohktiirov, a little man, sat opposite 
Weyrother, with an assiduous and modest 
mien, and stooping over the outspread map 
conscientiously studied the dispositions and 
the unfamiliar locality. He asked Weyrother 
several times to repeat words he had not clear- 
ly heard and the difficult names of villages. 
Weyrother complied and Dohkturov noted 
them down. 

When the reading which lasted more than 
an hour was over, Langeron again brought his 
snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Wey- 
rother or at anyone in particular, began to say 
how difficult it was to carry out such a plan in 
which the enemy's position was assumed to be 
known, whereas it was perhaps not known, 
since the enemy was in movement. Langeron 's 
objections were valid but it was obvious that 
their chief aim was to show General Weyroth- 
er who had read his dispositions with as much 
self-confidence as if he were addressing school 
children that he had to do, not with fools, but 
witlrmen who could teach him something in 
military matters. 

When the monotonous sound of Weyroth- 
er's voice ceased, Kutuzov opened his eye as a 
miller wakes up when the soporific drone of 
the mill wheel is interrupted. He listened to 
what Langeron said, as if remarking, "So you 
are still at that silly business!" quickly closed 
his eye again, and let his head sink still lower. 

Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to 
sting Weyrother's vanity as author of the mili- 
tary plan, argued that Bonaparte might easily 
attack instead of being attacked, and so render 
the whole of this plan perfectly worthless. 
Weyrother met all objections with a firm and 
contemptuous smile, evidently prepared be- 
forehand to meet all objections be they what 
they might. 

"If he could attack us, he would have done 
so today," said he. 

"So you think he is powerless?" said Langer- 
on. 

"He has forty thousand men at most," re- 
plied Weyrother, with the smile of a doctor to 
whom an old wife wishes to explain the treat- 
ment of a case. 



"In that case he is inviting his doom by 
awaiting our attack," said Langeron, with a 
subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for 
support to Milorddovich who was near him. 

But Milorddovich was at that moment evi- 
dently thinking of anything rather than of 
what the generals were disputing about. 

"Ma foil" said he, "tomorrow we shall see 
all that on the battlefield." 

Weyrother again gave that smile which 
seemed to say that to him it was strange and 
ridiculous to meet objections from Russian 
generals and to have to prove to them what he 
had not merely convinced himself of, but had 
also convinced the sovereign Emperors of. 

"The enemy has quenched his fires and a 
continual noise is heard from his camp," said 
he. "What does that mean? Either he is retreat- 
ing, which is the only thing we need fear, or 
he is changing his position." (He smiled iron- 
ically.) "But even if he also took up a position 
in the Thuerassa, he merely saves us a great 
deal of trouble and all our arrangements to 
the minutest detail remain the same." 

"How is that? . . ." began Prince Andrew, 
who had for long been waiting an opportunity 
to express his doubts. 

Kutuzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and 
looked round at the generals. 

"Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow 
or rather for today, for it is past midnight 
cannot now be altered," said he. "You have 
heard them, and we shall all do our duty. But 
before a battle, there is nothing more impor- 
tant . . ." he paused, "than to have a good 
sleep." 

He moved as if to rise. The generals bowed 
and retired. It was past midnight. Prince An- 
drew went out. 

The council of war, at which Prince Andrew 
had not been able to express his opinion as he 
had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy 
impression. Whether Dolgoriikov and Wey- 
rother, or Kutuzov, Langeron, and the others 
who did not approve of the plan of attack, 
were right he did not know. "But was it really 
not possible for Kutiizov to state his views 
plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on 
account of court and personal considerations 
tens of thousands of lives, and my life, my life," 
he thought, "must be risked?" 

"Yes, it is very likely that I shall be killed 
tomorrow," he thought. And suddenly, at this 
thought of death, a whole series of most dis- 
tant, most intimate, memories rose in his im- 



BOOK 

agination: he remembered his last parting from 
his father and his wife; he remembered the 
days when he first loved her. He thought of 
her pregnancy and felt sorry for her and for 
himself, and in a nervously emotional and sof- 
tened mood he went out of the hut in which 
he was billeted with Nesvitski and began to 
walk up and down before it. 

The night was foggy and through the fog the 
moonlight gleamed mysteriously. "Yes, tomor- 
row, tomorrow!" he thought. "Tomorrow ev- 
erything may be over for me! All these mem- 
ories will be no more, none of them will have 
any meaning for me. Tomorrow perhaps, even 
certainly, I have a presentiment that for the 
first time I shall have to show all I can do." 
And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the 
concentration of fighting at one point, and the 
hesitation of all the commanders. And then 
that happy moment, that Toulon for which he 
had so long waited, presents itself to him at 
last. He firmly and clearly expresses his opin- 
ion to Kutuzov, to Weyrother, and to the Em- 
perors. All are struck by the justness of his 
views, but no one undertakes to carry them 
out, so he takes a regiment, a divisionstipu- 
lates that no one is to interfere with his ar- 
rangementsleads his division to the decisive 
point, and gains the victory alone. "But death 
and suffering?" suggested another voice. Prince 
Andrew, however, did not answer that voice 
and went on dreaming of his triumphs. The 
dispositions for the next battle are planned by 
him alone. Nominally he is only an adjutant 
on Kutiizov's staff, but he does everything 
alone. The next battle is won by him alone. 
Kutuzov is removed and he is appointed . . . 
"Well and then?" asked the other voice. "If 
before that you are not ten times wounded, 
killed, or betrayed, well . . . what then? . . ." 
"Well then," Prince Andrew answered himself, 
"I don't know what will happen and don't 
want to know, and can't, but if I want this 
want glory, want to be known to men, want to 
be loved by them, it is not my fault that I want 
it and want nothing but that and live only for 
that. Yes, for that alone! I shall never tell any- 
one, but, oh God! what am I to do if I love 
nothing but fame and men's esteem? Death, 
wounds, the loss of family I fear nothing. And 
precious and dear as many persons are to me 
father, sister, wife those dearest to me yet 
dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give 
them all at once for a moment of glory, of tri- 
umph over men, of love from men I don't 
know and never shall know, for the love of 



THREE 147 

these men here," he thought, as he listened to 
voices in Kuttizov's courtyard. The voices were 
those of the orderlies who were packing up; 
one voice, probably a coachman's, was teasing 
Kutiizov's old cook whom Prince Andrew knew, 
and who was called Tit. He was saying, "Tit, 
I say, Tit!" 

"Well?" returned the old man. 

"Go, Tit, thresh a bit!" said the wag. 

"Oh, go to the devil!" called out a voice, 
drowned by the laughter of the orderlies and 
servants. 

"All the same, I love and value nothing but 
triumph over them all, I value this mystic pow- 
er and glory that is floating here above me in 
this mist!" 

CHAPTER XIII 

THAT SAME NIGHT, Rost6v was with a platoon 
on skirmishing duty in front of Bagrati6n's 
detachment. His hussars were placed along the 
line in couples and he himself rode along the 
line trying to master the sleepiness that kept 
coming over him. An enormous space, with 
our army's campfires dimly glowing in the fog, 
could be seen behind him; in front of him was 
misty darkness. Rostov could see nothing, peer 
as he would into that foggy distance: now some- 
thing gleamed gray, now there was something 
black, now little lights seemed to glimmer 
where the enemy ought to be, now he fancied 
it was only something in his own eyes. His eyes 
kept closing, and in his fancy appeared now 
the Emperor, now Denfsov, and now Moscow 
memories and he again hurriedly opened his 
eyes and saw close before him the head and 
ears of the horse he was riding, and sometimes, 
when he came within six paces of them, the 
black figures of hussars, but in the distance 
was still the same misty darkness. "Why not? 
... It might easily happen," thought Rost6v, 
"that the Emperor will meet me and give me 
an order as he would to any other officer; he'll 
say: 'Go and find out what's there.' There are 
many stories of his getting to know an officer in 
just such a chance way and attaching him to 
himself! What if he gave me a place near him? 
Oh, how I would guard him, how I would tell 
him the truth, how I would unmask his deceiv- 
ers!" And in order to realize vividly his love and 
devotion to the sovereign, Rost6v pictured to 
himself an enemy or a deceitful German, whom 
he would not only kill with pleasure but whom 
he would slap in the face before the Emperor. 
Suddenly a distant shout aroused him. He 
started and opened his eyes. 



148 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line 
. . . pass and watchword sh aft, Olmutz. What a 
nuisance that our squadron will be in reserve 
tomorrow/' he thought. "I'll ask leave to go to 
the front, this may be my only chance of see- 
ing the Emperor. It won't be long now before 
I am off duty. I'll take another turn and when 
I get back I'll go to the general and ask him." 
He readjusted himself in the saddle and touched 
up his horse to ride once more round his hus- 
sars. It seemed to him that it was getting light- 
er. To the left he saw a sloping descent lit up, 
and facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep 
as a wall. On this knoll there was a white patch 
that Rost6v could not at all make out: was it a 
glade in the wood lit up by the moon, or some 
unmelted snow, or some white houses? He even 
thought something moved on that white spot. 
"I expect it's snow . . . that spot ... a spot une 
tache/' he thought. "There now . . . it's not a 
tache . . . Natasha . . . sister, black eyes . . . Na 
. . . tasha . . . (Won't she be surprised when I 
tell her how I've seen the Emperor?) Natcisha 
. . . take mysabretache . . .""Keep to theright, 
your honor, there are bushes here," came the 
voice of an hussar, past whom Rost6v was rid- 
ing in the act of falling asleep. Rost6v lifted his 
head that had sunk almost to his horse's mane 
and pulled up beside the hussar. He was suc- 
cumbing to irresistible, youthful, childish drow- 
siness. "But what was I thinking? I mustn't for- 
get. How shall I speak to the Emperor? No, 
that's not it that's tomorrow. Oh yes! Natdsha 
. . . sabretache . . . saber them . . . Whom? The 
hussars . . . Ah, the hussars with mustaches. 
Along the Tverskiya Street rode the hussar 
with mustaches ... I thought about him too, 
just opposite Guryev's house . . . Old Guryev 
. . . Oh, but Denfsov's a fine fellow. But that's 
all nonsense. The chief thing is that the Em- 
peror is here. How he looked at me and wished 

to say something, but dared not No, it was 

I who dared not. But that's nonsense, the chief 
thing is not to forget the important thing I was 
thinking of. Yes, Na-tdsha, sabretache, oh, yes, 
yes! That's right!" And his head once more 
sank to his horse's neck. All at once it seemed 
to him that he was being fired at. "What? 
What? What? . . . Cut them down! What? . . ." 
said Rost6v, waking up. At the moment he 
opened his eyes he heard in front of him, where 
the enemy was, the long-drawn shouts of thou- 
sands of voices. His horse and the horse of the 
hussar near him pricked their ears at these 
shouts. Over there, where the shouting came 
from, a fire flared up and went out again, then 



another, and all along the French line on the 
hill fires flared up and the shouting grew loud- 
er and louder. Rost6v could hear the sound of 
French words but could not distinguish them. 
The din of many voices was too great; all he 
could hear was: "ahahah!" and "rrrr!" 

"What's that? What do you make of it?" said 
Rost6v to the hussar beside him. "That must 
be the enemy's camp!" 

The hussar did not reply. 

"Why, don't you hear it?" Rost6v asked 
again, after waiting for a reply. 

"Who can tell, your honor?" replied the hus- 
sar reluctantly. 

"From the direction, it must be the enemy," 
repeated Rost6v. 

"It may be he or it may be nothing," muttered 
the hussar. "It's dark . . . Steady!" he cried to 
his fidgeting horse. 

Rost6v's horse was also getting restive: it 
pawed the frozen ground, pricking its ears at 
the noise and looking at the lights. The shout- 
ing grew still louder and merged into a general 
roar that only an army of several thousand 
men could produce. The lights spread farther 
and farther, probably along the line of the 
French camp. Rost6v no longer wanted to 
sleep. The gay triumphant shouting of the 
enemy army had a stimulating effect on him. 
"Vive I'Empereur! VEmpereur!" he now 
heard distinctly. 

"They can't be far off, probably just beyond 
the stream," he said to the hussar beside him. 

The hussar only sighed without replying and 
coughed angrily. The sound of horse's hoofs 
approaching at a trot along the line of hussars 
was heard, and out of the foggy darkness the 
figure of a sergeant of hussars suddenly ap- 
peared, looming huge as an elephant. 

"Your honor, the generals I "said the sergeant, 
riding up to Rost6v. 

Rostov, still looking round toward the fires 
and the shouts, rode with the sergeant to meet 
some mounted men who were riding along the 
line. One was on a white horse. Prince Bagra- 
ti6n and Prince Dolgorukov with their adju- 
tants had come to witness the curious phenom- 
enon of the lights and shouts in the enemy's 
camp. Rost6v rode up to Bagrati6n, reported 
to him, and then joined the adjutants listen- 
ing to what the generals were saying. 

"Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, ad- 
dressing Bagrati6n, "it is nothing but a trick! 
He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to 
kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us." 

"Hardly," said Bagrati6n. "I saw them this 



BOOK THREE 



149 



evening on that knoll; if they had retreated 
they would have withdrawn from that too. . . . 
Officer!" said Bagratidn to Rost6v, "are the en- 
emy's skirmishers still there?" 

"They were there this evening, but now I 
don't know, your excellency. Shall I go with 
some of my hussars to see?" replied Rost6v. 

Bagrati6n stopped and, before replying, 
tried to see Rost6v's face in the mist. 

"Well, go and see," he said, after a pause. 

"Yes, sir." 

Rost6v spurred his horse, called to Sergeant 
Fddchenko and two other hussars, told them to 
follow him, and trotted downhill in the direc- 
tion from which the shouting came. He felt 
both frightened and pleased to be riding alone 
with three hussars into that mysterious and 
dangerous misty distance where no one had 
been before him. Bagrati6n called to him from 
the hill not to go beyond the stream, but Ros- 
tdv pretended not to hear him and did not 
stop but rodeon and on, continually mistaking 
bushes for trees and gullies for men and con- 
tinually discovering his mistakes. Having de- 
scended the hill at a trot, he no longer saw ei- 
ther our own or the enemy's fires, but heard 
the shouting of the French more loudly and 
distinctly. In the valley he saw before him 
something like a river, but when he reached it 
he found it was a road. Having come out onto 
the road he reined in his horse, hesitating 
whether to ride along it or cross it and ride 
over the black field up the hillside. To keep to 
the road which gleamed white in the mist 
would have been safer because it would be 
easier to see people coming along it. "Follow 
me!" said he, crossed the road, and began rid- 
ing up the hill at a gallop toward the point 
where the French pickets had been standing 
that evening. 

"Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the 
hussars behind him. And before Rost6v had 
time to make out what the black thing was 
that had suddenly appeared in the fog, there 
was a flash, followed by a report, and a bullet 
whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintive 
sound passed out of hearing. Another musket 
missed fire but flashed in the pan. Rost6v 
turned his horse and galloped back. Four more 
reports followed at intervals, and the bullets 
passed somewhere in the fog singing in differ- 
ent tones. Rost6v reined in his horse, whose 
spirits had risen, like his own, at the firing, and 
went back at a footpace. "Well, some more! 
Some more!" a merry voice was saying in his 
soul. But no more shots came. 



Only when approaching Bagrati6n did Ros- 
t6v let his horse gallop again, and with his hand 
at the salute rode up to the general. 

Dolgorukov was still insisting that the 
French had retreated and had only lit fires to 
deceive us. 

"What does that prove?" he was saying as 
Rost6v rode up. "They might rejreat and leave 
the pickets." 

"It's plain that they have not all gone yet, 
Prince," said Bagration. "Wait till tomorrow 
morning, we'll find out everything tomorrow." 

"The picket is still on the hill, your excel- 
lency, just where itwas in the even ing, "report- 
ed Rostov, stooping forward with his hand at 
the salute and unable to repress the smile of 
delight induced by his ride and especially by 
the sound of the bullets. 

"Very good, very good," said Bagrati6n. 
"Thank you, officer." 

"Your excellency," said Rost6v, "may I ask a 
favor?" 

"What is it?" 

"Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. 
May I ask to beattached to the first squadron?" 

"What's your name?" 

"Count Rost6v." 

"Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance 
on me." 

"Count Ily Rost6v's son?" asked Dolgoru- 
kov. 

But Rost6v did not reply. 

"Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?" 

"I will give the order." 

"Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with 
some message to the Emperor," thought Rost6v. 
"Thank God!" 

The fires and shouting in the enemy's army 
were occasioned by the fact that while Napole- 
on's proclamation was being read to the troops 
the Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs. 
The soldiers, on seeing him, lit wisps of straw 
and ran after him, shouting, "Vive I'Emper- 
eurl" Napoleon's proclamation was as follows: 

Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against 
you to avenge the Austrian army of Ulm. They are 
the same battalions you broke at Hollabrunn and 
have pursued ever since to this place. The position 
we occupy is a strong one, and while they are 
marching to go round me on the right they will 
expose a flank to me. Soldiers! I will myself direct 
your battalions. I will keep out of fire if you with 
your habitual valor carry disorder and confusion 
into the enemy's ranks, but should victory be in 
doubt, even for a moment, you will see your Em- 



1 5 

peror exposing himself to the first blows of the 
enemy, for there must be no doubt of victory, es- 
pecially on this day when what is at stake is the 
honor of the French infantry, so necessary to the 
honor of our nation. 

Do not break your ranks on the plea of remov- 
ing the wounded! Let every man be fully imbued 
with the thought that we must defeat these hire- 
lings of England, inspired by such hatred of our 
nation! This victory will conclude our campaign 
and we can return to winter quarters, where fresh 
French troops who are being raised in France will 
join us, and the peace I shall conclude will be 
worthy of my people, of you, and of myself. 

NAPOLEON 



CHAPTER XIV 

AT FIVE in the morning it was still quite dark. 
The troops of the center, the reserves, and Ba- 
grati6n's right flank had not yet moved, but on 
the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, 
and artillery, which were to be the first to de- 
scend the heights to attack the French right 
flank and drive it into the Bohemian moun- 
tains according to plan, were already up and 
astir. The smoke of the campfires, into which 
they were throwing everything superfluous, 
made the eyes smart. It was cold and dark. The 
officers were hurriedly drinking tea and break- 
fasting, the soldiers, munching biscuitand beat- 
ing a tattoo with their feet to warm themselves, 
gathering round the fires throwing into the 
flames the remains of sheds, chairs, tables, 
wheels, tubs, and everything that they did not 
want or could not carry away with them. Aus- 
trian column guides were moving in and out 
among the Russian troops and served as her- 
alds of the advance. As soon as an Austrian of- 
ficer showed himself near a commanding offi- 
cer's quarters, the regiment began to move: the 
soldiers ran from the fires, thrust their pipes in- 
to their boots, their bags into the carts, got 
their muskets ready, and formed rank. The of- 
ficers buttoned up their coats, buckled on their 
swords and pouches, and moved along the ranks 
shouting. The train drivers and orderlies har- 
nessed and packed the wagons and tied on the 
loads. The adjutants and battalion and regi- 
mental commanders mounted, crossed them- 
selves, gave final instructions, orders, and com- 
missions to the baggage men who remained be- 
hind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands 
of feet resounded. The column moved forward 
without knowing where and unable, from the 
masses around them, the smoke and the increas- 
ing fog, to see either the place they were leav- 
ing or that to which they were going. 



WAR AND PEACE 

A soldier on the march is hemmed in and 
borne along by his regiment as much as a 
sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, 
whatever strange, unknown, and dangerous 
places he reaches, just as a sailor is always sur- 
rounded by the same decks, masts, and rigging 
of his ship, so the soldier always has around 
him the same comrades, the same ranks, the 
same sergeant major Ivan Mitrich, the same 
company dog Jack, and the same commanders. 
The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in 
which his ship is sailing, but on the day of bat- 
tleheaven knows how and whencea stern 
note of which all are conscious sounds in the 
moral atmosphere of an army, announcing the 
approach of something decisive and solemn, 
and awakening in the men an unusual curios- 
ity. On the day of battle the soldiers excitedly 
try to get beyond the interests of their regiment, 
they listen intently, look about, and eagerly 
ask concerning what is going on around them. 

The fog had grown so dense that though it 
was growing light they could not see ten paces 
ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees and 
level ground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, 
on any side, one might encounter an enemy in- 
visible ten paces off. But the columns advanced 
for a long time, always in thesame fog, descend- 
ing and ascending hills, avoiding gardens and 
enclosures, going over new and unknown 
ground, and nowhere encountering the enemy. 
On the contrary, the soldiers became aware 
that in front, behind, and on all sides, other 
Russian columns were moving in the same di- 
rection. Every soldier felt glad to know that to 
the unknown place where he was going, many 
more of our men were going too. 

"There now, the Kiirskies have also gone 
past," was being said in the ranks. 

"It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have 
gathered, lads 1 Last night I looked at thecamp- 
fires and there was no end of them. A regular 
Moscow 1" 

Though none of the column commanders 
rode up to the ranks or talked to the men (the 
commanders, as we saw at the council of war, 
were out of humor and dissatisfied with the af- 
fair, and so did not exert themselves to cheer 
the men but merely carried out the orders), yet 
the troops marched gaily, as they always do 
when going into action, especially to an attack. 
But when they had marched for about an hour 
in the dense fog, the greater part of the men 
had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness of 
some dislocation and blunder spread through 
the ranks. How such a consciousness is com- 



BOOK THREE 



municated is very difficult to define, but it cer- 
tainly is communicated very surely, and flows 
rapidly, imperceptibly, and irrepressibly, as 
water does in a creek. Had the Russian army 
been alone without any allies, it might perhaps 
have been a long time before this consciousness 
of mismanagement became a general convic- 
tion, but as it was, the disorder was readily 
andnaturally attributed to thestupid Germans, 
and everyone was convinced that a dangerous 
muddle had been occasioned by the sausage 
eaters. 

"Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? 
Or have we already come up against the 
French?" 

"No, one can't hear them. They'd be firing 
if we had." 

"They were in a hurry enough to start us, 
and now here we stand in the middle of a field 
without rhyme or reason. It's all those damned 
Germans' muddling! What stupid devils!" 

"Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, 
they're crowding up behind. And now here we 
stand hungry." 

"I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the 
cavalry are blocking the way," said an officer. 

"Ah, those damned Germans! They don't 
know their own country!" said another. 

"What division are you?" shouted an adju- 
tant, riding up. 

"The Eighteenth." 

"Then why are you here? You should have 
gone on long ago, now you won't get there till 
evening." 

"What stupid orders! They don't themselves 
know what they are doing!" said the officer and 
rode off. 

Then a general rode past shouting something 
angrily, not in Russian. 

"Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabbering no one 
can make out," said a soldier, mimicking the 
general who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them, 
the scoundrels!" 

"We were ordered to be at the place before 
nine, but we haven't got halfway. Fine orders!" 
was being repeated on different sides. 

And the feeling of energy with which the 
troops had started began to turn into vexation 
and anger at the stupid arrangements and at 
the Germans. 

The cause of the confusion was that while 
the Austrian cavalry was moving toward our 
left flank, the higher command found that our 
center was too far separated from our right 
flank and the cavalry were all ordered to turn 
back to the right. Several thousand cavalry 



crossed in front of the infantry, who had to 
wait. 

At the front an altercation occurred between 
an Austrian guide and a Russian general. The 
general shouted a demand that the cavalry 
should be halted, the Austrian argued that not 
he, but the higher command, was to blame. 
The troops meanwhile stood growing listless 
and dispirited. After an hour's delay they at 
last moved on, descending the hill. The fog 
that was dispersing on the hill lay still more 
densely below, where they were descending. In 
front in the fog a shot was heard and then an- 
other, at first irregularly at varying intervals 
trata . . . tat and then more and more regular- 
ly and rapidly, and the action at the Goldbach 
Stream began. 

Not expecting to come on the enemy down 
by the stream, and having stumbled on him in 
the fog, hearing no encouraging word from 
their commanders, and with a consciousness of 
being too late spreading through the ranks, 
and above all being unable to see anything in 
front or around them in the thick fog, the 
Russians exchanged shots with the enemy la- 
zily and advanced and again halted, receiving 
no timely orders from ttye officers or adjutants 
who wandered about in the fog in those un- 
known surroundings unable to find their own 
regiments. In this way the action began for 
the first, second, and third columns, which had 
gone down into the valley. The fourth col- 
umn, with which Kutiizov was, stood on the 
Pratzen Heights. 

Below, where the fight was beginning, there 
was still thick fog; on the higher ground it was 
clearing, but nothing could be seen of what 
was going on in front. Whether all the enemy 
forces were, as we supposed, six miles away, or 
whether they were near by in that sea of mist, 
no one knew till after eight o'clock. 

It was nine o'clock in the morning. The fog 
lay unbroken like a sea down below, but high- 
er up at the village of Schlappanitz where Na- 
poleon stood with his marshals around him, it 
was quite light. Above him was a clear blue sky, 
and the sun's vast orb quivered like a huge hol- 
low, crimson float on the surface of that milky 
sea of mist. The whole French army, and even 
Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on 
the far side of the streams and hollows of Sok- 
olnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which we in- 
tended to take up our position and begin the 
action, but were on this side, so close to our 
own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye 
could distinguish a mounted man from one on 



WAR AND PEACE 



foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak which he had 
worn on his Italian campaign, sat on his small 
gray Arab horse a little in front of his marshals. 
He gazed silently at the hills which seemed to 
rise out of the sea of mist and on which the 
Russian troops were moving in the distance, 
and he listened to the sounds of firing in the 
valley. Not a single muscle of his face which 
in those days was still thin moved. His gleam- 
ing eyes were fixed intently on one spot. His 
predictions were being justified. Part of the 
Russian force had already descended into the 
valley toward the ponds and lakes and part 
were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he 
intended to attack and regarded as the key to 
the position. He saw over the mist that in a hol- 
low between two hills near the village of Prat- 
zen, the Russian columns, their bayonets glit- 
tering, were moving continuously in one direc- 
tion toward the valley and disappearing one 
after another into the mist. From information 
he had received the evening before, from the 
sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the out- 
posts during the night, by the disorderly move- 
ment of the Russian columns, and from all in- 
dications, he saw clearly that the allies believed 
him to be far away in front of them, and that 
the columns moving near Pratzen constituted 
the center of the Russian army, and that that 
center was already sufficiently weakened to be 
successfully attacked. But still he did not begin 
the engagement. 

Today was a great day for him the anniver- 
sary of his coronation. Before dawn he had 
slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, 
and in good spirits, he mounted his horse and 
rode out into the field in that happy mood in 
which every thing seems possible and everything 
succeeds. He sat motionless, looking at the 
heights visible above the mist, and his cold face 
wore that special look of confident, self-com- 
placent happiness that one sees on the face of 
a boy happily in love. The marshals stood be- 
feind him not venturing to distract his atten- 
tion. He looked now at the Pratzen Heights, 
now at the sun floating up out of the mist. 

When the sun had entirely emerged from 
the fog, and fields and mist were aglow with 
dazzling light as if he had only awaited this to 
begin the action he drew the glove from his 
shapely white hand, made a sign with it to the 
marshals, and ordered the action to begin. The 
marshals, accompanied by adjutants, galloped 
off in different directions, and a few minutes 
later the chief forces of the French army moved 
rapidly toward those Pratzen Heights which 



were being more and more denuded by Rus- 
sian troops moving down the valley to their 
left 

CHAPTER XV 

AT EIGHT O'CLOCK Kuttizov rode to Pratzen at 
the head of the fourth column, Milorddovich's, 
the one that was to take the place of Przeby- 
szlwski's and Langeron's columns which had 
already gone down into the valley. He greeted 
the men of the foremost regiment and gave 
them the order to march, thereby indicating 
that he intended to lead that column himself. 
When he had reached the village of Pratzen he 
halted. Prince Andrew was behind, among the 
immense number forming the commander in 
chiefs suite. He was in a state of suppressed ex- 
citement and irritation, though controlledly 
calm as a man is at the approach of a long- 
awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that 
this was the day of his Toulon, or his bridge of 
Arcola. 1 How it would come about he did not 
know, but he felt sure it would do so. The lo- 
cality and the position of our troops were 
known to him as far as they could be known to 
anyone in our army. His own strategic plan, 
which obviously could not now be carried out, 
was forgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother's 
plan, Prince Andrew considered possible con- 
tingencies and formed new projects such as 
might call for his rapidity of perception and 
decision. 

To the left down below in the mist, the mus- 
ketry fire of unseen forces could be heard. It 
was there Prince Andrew thought the fight 
would concentrate. "There we shall encounter 
difficulties, and there," thought he, "I shall be 
sent with a brigade or division, and there, stand- 
ard in hand, I shall go forward and break what- 
ever is in front of me." 

He could not look calmly at the standards of 
the passing battalions. Seeing them he kept 
thinking, "That may be the very standard with 
which I shall lead the army." 

In the morning all that was left of the night 
mist on the heights was a hoar frost now turn- 
ing to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a 
milk-white sea. Nothing was visible in the val- 
ley to the left into which our troops had de- 
scended and from whence came the sounds of 
firing. Above the heights was the dark clear sky, 
and to the right the vast orb of the sun. In 
front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of 

x The scene of Napoleon's brilliant victory in 
the province of Verona over greatly superior Aus- 
trian forces, in 1796. TR. 



BOOK THREE 



153 



mist, some wooded hills were discernible, and 
it was there the enemy probably was, for some- 
thing could be descried. On the right the 
Guards were entering the misty region with a 
sound of hoofs and wheels and now and then 
a gleam of bayonets; to the left beyond the vil- 
lage similar masses of cavalry came up and dis- 
appeared in the sea of mist. In front and behind 
moved infantry. The commander in chief was 
standing at the end of the village letting the 
troops pass by him. That morning Kutuzov 
seemed worn and irritable. The infantry pass- 
ing before him came to a halt without any 
command being given, apparently obstructed 
by something in front. 

"Do order them to form into battalion col- 
umns and go round the villagel" he said angri- 
ly to a general who had ridden up. "Don't you 
understand, your excellency, my dear sir, that 
you must not defile through narrow village 
streets when we are marching against the ene- 
my?" 

"I intended to re-form them beyond the vil- 
lage, your excellency," answered the general. 

Kutuzov laughed bitterly. 

"You'll make a fine thing of it, deploying in 
sight of the enemy! Very fine!" 

"The enemy is still far away, your excellency. 
According to the dispositions . . ." 

"The dispositions!" exclaimed Kutuzov bit- 
terly. "Who told you that? . . . Kindly do as you 
are ordered." 

"Yes, sir." 

"My dear fellow," Nesvftski whispered to 
Prince Andrew, "the old man is as surly as a 
dog." 

An Austrian officer in a white uniform with 
green plumes in his hat galloped up to Kutu- 
zov and asked in the Emperor's name had the 
fourth column advanced into action. 

Kutuzov turned round without answering 
and his eye happened to fall upon Prince An- 
drew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutu- 
zov's malevolent and caustic expression sof- 
tened, as if admitting that what was being done 
was not his adjutant's fault, and still not an- 
swering the Austrian adjutant, he addressed 
Bolk6nski. 

"Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the 
third division has passed the village. Tell it to 
stop and await my orders." 

Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he 
stopped him. 

"And ask whether sharpshooters have been 
posted," he added. "What are they doing? 
What are they doing?" he murmured to him- 



self, still not replying to the Austrian. 

Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the 
order. 

Overtaking the battalions that continued to 
advance, he stopped the third division and con- 
vinced himself that there really were no sharp- 
shooters in front of our columns. The colonel 
at the head of the regiment was much surprised 
at the commander in chief's order to throw out 
skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that 
there were other troops in front of him and 
that the enemy must be at least six miles away. 
There was really nothing to be seen in front 
except a barren descent hidden by dense mist. 
Having given orders in the commander in 
chief's name to rectify this omission, Prince 
Andrew galloped back. Kutuzov still in the 
same place, his stout body resting heavily in 
the saddle with the lassitude of age, sat yawn- 
ing wearily with closed eyes. The troops were 
no longer moving, but stood with the butts of 
their muskets on the ground. 

"All right, all right!" he said to Prince An- 
drew, and turned to a general who, watch in 
hand, was saying it was time they started as all 
the left-flank columns had already descended. 

"Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered 
Kutuzov in the midst of a yawn. "Plenty of 
time," he repeated. 

Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was 
heard the sound of regiments saluting, and 
this sound rap idly came nearer along the whole 
extended line of the advancing Russian col- 
umns. Evidently the person they were greeting 
was riding quickly. When the soldiers of the 
regiment in front of which Kutuzov was stand- 
ing began to shout, he rode a little to one side 
and looked round with a frown. Along the road 
from Pratzen galloped what looked like a 
squadron of horsemen in various uniforms. 
Two of them rode side by side in front, at full 
gallop. One in a black uniform with white 
plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut 
horse, the other who was in a white uniform 
rode a black one. These were the two Emper- 
ors followed by their suites. Kutuzov, affecting 
the manners of an old soldier at the front, 
gave the command "Attention!" and rode up 
to the Emperors with a salute. His whole ap- 
pearance and manner were suddenly trans- 
formed. He put on the air of a subordinate 
who obeys without reasoning. With an affecta- 
tion of respect which evidently struck Alex- 
ander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted. 

This unpleasant impression merely flitted 
over the young and happy face of the Emperor 



154 



WAR AND PEACE 



like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and van- 
ished. After his illness he looked rather thin- 
ner that day than on the field of Olmiitz where 
Bolkonski had seen him for the first time 
abroad, but there was still the same bewitching 
combination of majesty and mildness in his 
fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same 
capacity for varying expression and the same 
prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocent 
youth. 

At the Olmiitz review he had seemed more 
majestic; here he seemed brighter and more 
energetic. He was slightly flushed after gallop- 
ing two miles, and reining in his horse he 
sighed restfully and looked round at the faces 
of his suite, young and animated as his own. 
Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Prince Volk6nsky, 
Str6gonov, and the others, all richly dressed 
gay young men on splendid, well-groomed, 
fresh, only slightly heated horses, exchanging 
remarks and smiling, had stopped behind the 
Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long- 
faced young man, sat very erect on his hand- 
some black horse, looking about him in a lei- 
surely and preoccupied manner. He beckoned 
to one of his white adjutants and asked some 
question"Most likely he is asking at what 
o'clock they started," thought Prince Andrew, 
watching his old acquaintance with a smile he 
could not repress as he recalled his reception 
at Brtinn. In the Emperors' suite were the 
picked young orderly officers of the Guard and 
line regiments, Russian and Austrian. Among 
them were grooms leading the Tsar's beautiful 
relay horses covered with embroidered cloths. 

As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh 
air from the fields enters a stuffy room, so a 
whiff of youthfulness, energy, and confidence 
of success reached Kutuzov's cheerless staff 
with the galloping advent of all these brilliant 
young men. 

"Why aren't you beginning, Michael Ilari6n- 
ovich?" said the Emperor Alexander hurried- 
ly to Kutuzov, glancing courteously at the 
same time at the Emperor Francis. 

"I am waiting, Your Majesty," answered Ku- 
tuzov, bending forward respectfully. 

The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his 
ear forward as if he had not quite heard. 

"Waiting, Your Majesty," repeated Kutiizov. 
(Prince Andrew noted that Kutiizov's upper 
lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word 
"waiting.") "Not all the columns have formed 
up yet, Your Majesty." 

The Tsar heard but obviously did not like 
the reply; he shrugged his rather round shoul- 



ders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near 
him, as if complaining of Kutiizov. 

"You know, Michael Ilari6novich, we are not 
on the Empress' Field where a parade does not 
begin till all the troops are assembled," said 
the Tsar with another glance at the Emperor 
Francis, as if inviting him if not to join in at 
least to listen to what he was saying. But the 
Emperor Francis continued to look about him 
and did not listen. 

"That is just why I do not begin, sire," said 
Kutuzov in a resounding voice, apparently to 
preclude the possibility of not being heard, 
and again something in his face twitched 
"That is just why I do not begin, sire, because 
we are not on parade and not on the Empress' 
Field," said he clearly and distinctly. 

In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid 
looks that expressed dissatisfaction and re- 
proach. "Old though he may be, he should not, 
he certainly should not, speak like that," their 
glances seemed to say. 

The Tsar looked intently and observantly 
into Kutuzov's eye waiting to hear whether he 
would say anything more. But Kutuzov, with 
respectfully bowed head, seemed also to be 
waiting. The silence lasted for about a min- 
ute. 

"However, if you command it, Your Majes- 
ty," said Kutiizov, lifting his head and again 
assuming his former tone of a dull, unreason- 
ing, but submissive general. 

He touched his horse and having called Mil- 
orddovich, the commander of the column, gave 
him the order to advance. 

The troops again began to move, and two 
battalions of the N6vgorod and one of the Ap- 
sheron regiment went forward past the Emper- 
or. 

As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the 
red- faced Milorddovich, without his greatcoat, 
with his Orders on his breast and an enormous 
tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one 
side with its corners front and back, galloped 
strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute 
reined in his horse before the Emperor. 

"God be with you, general!" said the Em- 
peror. 

"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans 
noire possibility, sire"' 1 he answered gaily, 
raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the 
gentlemen of the Tsar's suite by his poor 
French. 

Milorddovich wheeled his horse sharply and 

1 "Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything that it is 
possible to do, Sire." 



BOOK 

stationed himself a little behind the Emperor. 
The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's pres- 
ence, passed in step before the Emperors and 
their suites at a bold, brisk pace. 

"Lads 1" shouted Milorddovich in a loud, self- 
confident, and cheery voice, obviously so elat- 
ed by the sound of firing, by the prospect of 
battle, and by the sight of the gallant Apsher- 
ons, his comrades in Suv6rov's time, now 
passing so gallantly before the Emperors, 
that he forgot the sovereigns' presence. "Lads, 
it's not the first village you've had to take," 
cried he. 

"Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers. 

The Emperor's horse started at the sudden 
cry. This horse that had carried the sovereign 
at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the 
field of Austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows 
of his left foot and pricking its ears at the sound 
of shots just as it had done on the Empress' Field, 
not understanding the significance of the fir- 
ing, nor of the nearness of the Emperor Fran- 
cis' black cob, nor of all that was being said, 
thought, and felt that day by its rider. 

The Emperor turned with a smile to one of 
his followers and made a remark to him, point- 
ing to the gallant Apsherons. 

CHAPTER XVI 

KUTI/ZOV accompanied by his adjutants rode 
at a walking pace behind the carabineers. 

When he had gone less than half a mile in 
the rear of the column he stopped at a solitary, 
deserted house that had probably once been an 
inn, where two roads parted. Both of them led 
downhill and troops were marching along 
both. 

The fog had begun to clear and enemy 
troops were already dimly visible about a mile 
and a half off on the opposite heights. Down 
below, on the left, the firing became more dis- 
tinct. Kutiizov had stopped and was speaking 
to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who 
was a little behind and looking at them, turned 
to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass. 

"Look, look! "said this adjutant, looking not 
at the troops in the distance, but down the hill 
before him. "It's the French!" 

The two generals and the adjutant took hold 
of the field glass, trying to snatch it from one 
another. The expression on all their faces sud- 
denly changed to one of horror. The French 
were supposed to be a mile and a half away, 
but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared 
just in front of us. 

"It's the enemy? . . . No! . . . Yes, see it isl 



THREE 155 

... for certain. . . . But how is that?" said dif- 
ferent voices. 

With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw be- 
low them to the right, not more than five hun- 
dred paces from where Kutiizov was standing, 
a dense French column coining up to meet the 
Apsherons. *&gt; 

"Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. 
My turn has come," thought Prince Andrew, 
and striking his horse he rode up to Kutiizov. 

"The Apsherons must be stopped, your ex- 
cellency," cried he. But at that very instant a 
cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was 
heard quite close at hand, and a voice of naive 
terror barely two steps from Prince Andrew 
shouted, "Brothers! All's lost!" And at this 
voice, as if at a command, everyone began to 
run. 

Confused and ever-increasing crowds were 
running back to where five minutes before the 
troops had passed the Emperors. Not only 
would it have been difficult to stop that crowd, 
it was even impossible not to be carried back 
with it oneself. Bolk6nski only tried not to lose 
touch with it, and looked around bewildered 
and unable to grasp what was happening in 
front of him. Nesvftski with an angry face, red 
and unlike himself, was shouting to Kutiizov 
that if he did not ride away at once he would 
certainly be taken prisoner. Kutiizov remained 
in the same place and without answering drew 
out a handkerchief. Blood was flowing from 
his cheek. Prince Andrew forced his way to 
him. 

"You are wounded?" he asked, hardly able 
to master the trembling of his lower jaw. 

"The wound is not here, it is there!" said 
Kutiizov, pressing the handkerchief to his 
wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing 
soldiers. "Stop them!" he shouted, and at the 
same moment, probably realizing that it was 
impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and 
rode to the right. 

A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him 
and bore him back with it. 

The troops were running in such a dense 
mass that once surrounded by them it was dif- 
ficult to get out again. One was shouting, "Get 
on! Why are you hinderingus?" Another in the 
same place turned round and fired in the air; a 
third was striking the horse Kutiizov himself 
rode. Having by a great effort got away to the 
left from that flood of men, Kutiizov, with his 
suite diminished by more than half, rode to- 
ward a sound of artillery fire near by. Having 
forced his way out of the crowd of fugitives, 



156 



WAR AND PEACE 



Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutuzov, 
saw on the slope of the hill amid the smoke a 
Russian battery that was still firingand French- 
men running toward it. Higher up stood some 
Russian infantry, neither moving forward to 
protect the battery nor backward with the flee- 
ing crowd. A mounted general separated him- 
self from the infantry and approached Kuttizov. 
Of Kutrizov's suite only four remained. They 
were all pale and exchanged looks in silence. 

"Stop those wretches 1" gasped Kutuzov to 
the regimental commander, pointing to the 
flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to pun- 
ish him for those words, bullets flew hissing 
across the regiment and across Kutiizov's suite 
like a flock of little birds. 

The French had attacked the battery and, 
seeing Kutuzov, were firing at him. After this 
volley the regimental commander clutched at 
his leg; several soldiers fell, and a second lieu- 
tenant who was holding the flag let it fall from 
his hands. It swayed and fell, but caught on the 
muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers 
started firing without orders. 

"Oh! Oh! Oh I 1 ' groaned Kutuzov despairing- 
ly and looked around. . . . "Bolk6nski!" he 
whispered, his voice trembling from a con- 
sciousness of the feebleness of age, "Bolk6nski ! " 
he whispered, pointing to the disordered bat- 
talion and at the enemy, "what's that?" 

But before he had finished speaking, Prince 
Andrew, feeling tears of shame and anger 
choking him, had already leapt from his horse 
and run to the standard. 

"Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice pierc- 
ing as a child's. 

"Here it is!" thought he, seizing the staff of 
the standard and hearing with pleasure the 
whistle of 'bullets evidently aimed at him. Sev- 
eral soldiers fell. 

"Hurrah!" shouted Prince Andrew, and, 
scarcely able to hold up the heavy standard, he 
ran forward with full confidence that the whole 
battalion would follow him. 

And really he only ran a few steps alone. 
One soldier moved and then another and soon 
the whole battalion ran forward shouting "Hur- 
rah!" and overtook him. A sergeant of the bat- 
talion ran up and took the flag that was sway- 
ing from its weight in Prince Andrew's hands, 
but he was immediately killed. Prince Andrew 
again seized the standard and, dragging it by 
the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he 
saw our artillerymen, some of whom were fight- 
ing, while others, having abandoned theirguns, 
were running toward him. He also saw French 



infantry soldiers who were seizing the artillery 
horses and turning the guns round. Prince An- 
drew and the battalion were already within 
twenty paces of the cannon. He heard the whis- 
tle of bullets above him unceasingly and to 
right and left of him soldiers continually 
groaned and dropped. But he did not look at 
them: he looked only at what was going on in 
front of him at the battery. He now saw clear- 
ly the figure of a red-haired gunner with his 
shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop 
while a French soldier tugged at the other. He 
could distinctly see the distraught yet angry 
expression on the faces of these two men, 
who evidently did not realize what they were 
doing. 

"What are they about?" thought Prince An- 
drew as he gazed at them. "Why doesn't the 
red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed? 
Why doesn't the Frenchman stab him? He will 
not get away before the Frenchman remembers 
his bayonet and stabs him. . . ." 

And really another French soldier, trailing 
his musket, ran up to the struggling men, and 
the fate of the red-haired gunner, who had tri- 
umphantly secured the mop and still did not 
realize what awaited him, was about to be de- 
cided. But Prince Andrew did not see how it 
ended. It seemed to him as though one of the 
soldiers near him hit him on the head with the 
full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt a little, but 
the worst of it was that the pain distracted him 
and prevented his seeing what he had been 
looking at. 

"What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giv- 
ing way," thought he, and fell on his back. He 
opened his eyes, hoping to see how the strug- 
gle of the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, 
whether the red-haired gunner had been killed 
or not and whether the cannon had been cap- 
tured or saved. But he saw nothing. Above 
him there was now nothing but the sky the 
lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, 
with gray clouds gliding slowly across it. "How 
quiet, peaceful, and solemn; notat all as I ran," 
thought Prince Andrew "not as we ran, shout- 
ing and fighting, not at all as the gunner and 
the Frenchman with frightened and angry 
faces struggled for the mop: how differently do 
those clouds glide across that lofty infinite sky! 
How was it I did not see that lofty sky before? 
And how happy I am to have found it at last! 
Yes! All is vanity, all falsehood, except that in- 
finite sky. There is nothing, nothing, but that. 
But even it does not exist, there is nothing but 
quiet and peace. Thank God! . . ." 



BOOK THREE 



'57 



CHAPTER XVII 

ON OUR RIGHT FLANK commanded by Bagrati6n, 
at nine o'clock the battle had not yet begun. 
Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov's demand 
to commence the action, and wishing to avert 
responsibility from himself, Prince Bagrati6n 
proposed to Dolgorukov to send to inquire of 
the commander in chief. Bagrati6n knew that 
as the distance between the two flanks was 
more than six miles, even if the messenger 
were not killed (which he very likely would 
be), and found the commander in chief (which 
would be very difficult), he would not be able 
to get back before evening. 

Bagrati6n cast his large, expressionless, sleepy 
eyes round his suite, and the boyish face of Ros- 
tov, breathless with excitement and hope, was 
the first to catch his eye. He sent him. 

"And if I should meet His Majesty before I 
meet the commander in chief, your excellency?" 
said Rost6v, with his hand to his cap. 

"You can give the message to His Majesty," 
said Dolgorukov, hurriedly interrupting Ba- 
grati6n. 

On being relieved from picket duty Rost6v 
had managed to get a few hours' sleep before 
morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute, 
with elasticity of movement, faith in his good 
fortune, and generally in that state of mind 
which makes everything seem possible, pleas- 
ant, and easy. 

All his wishes were being fulfilled that morn- 
ing: there was to be a general engagement in 
which he was taking part, more than that, he 
was orderly to the bravest general, and still 
more, he was going with a message to Kutiizov, 
perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The 
morning was bright, he had a good horse under 
him, and his heart was full of joy and happi- 
ness. On receiving the order he gave his horse 
the rein and galloped along the line. At first 
he rode along the line of Bagrati6n's troops, 
which had not yet advanced into action but 
were standing motionless; then he came to the 
region occupied by Uvarov's cavalry and here 
he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for 
battle; having passed Uvarov's cavalry he clear- 
ly heard the sound of cannon and musketry 
ahead of him. The firing grew louder and loud- 
er. 

In the fresh morning air were now heard, 
not two or three musket shots at irregular in- 
tervals as before, followed by one or two can- 
non shots, but a roll of volleys of musketry 
from the slopes of the hill before Pratzen, in- 
terrupted by such frequent reports of cannon 



that sometimes several of them were not sep- 
arated from one another but merged into a 
general roar. 

He could see puffs of musketry smoke that 
seemed to chase one another down the hill- 
sides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, 
spreading, and mingling with one another. He 
could also, by the gleam of bayonets visible 
through the smoke, make out moving masses 
of infantry and narrow lines of artillery with 
green caissons. 

Rost6v stopped his horse for a moment on a 
hillock to see what was going on, but strain his 
attention as he would he could not understand 
or make out anything of what was happening: 
there in the smoke men of some sort were mov- 
ing about, and in front and behind moved lines 
of troops; but why, whither, and who they were, 
it was impossible to make out. These sights and 
sounds had no depressing or intimidating ef- 
fect on him; on the contrary, they stimulated 
his energy and determination. 

"Go on! Go on! Give it them!" he mentally 
exclaimed at these sounds, and again proceed- 
ed to gallop along the line, penetrating farther 
and farther into the region where the army 
was already in action. 

"How it will be there I don't know, but all 
will be well!" thought Rost6v. 

After passing some Austrian troops he no- 
ticed that the next part of the line (the Guards) 
was already in action. 

"So much the better! I shall see it close," he 
thought. 

He was riding almost along the front line. A 
handful of men came galloping toward him. 
They were our Uhlans who with disordered 
ranks were returning from the attack. Rost6v 
got out of their way, involuntarily noticed that 
one of them was bleeding, and galloped on. 

"That is no business of mine," he thought. 
He had not ridden many hundred yards after 
that before he saw to his left, across the whole 
width of the field, an enormous mass of caval- 
ry in brilliant white uniforms, mounted on 
black horses, trotting straight toward him and 
across his path. Rostov put his horse to full 
gallop to get out of the way of these men, and 
he would have got clear had they continued at 
the same speed, but they kept increasing their 
pace, so that some of the horses were already 
galloping. Rost6v heard the thud of their hoofs 
and the jingle of their weapons and saw their 
horses, their figures, and even their faces, 
more and more distinctly. They were our 
Horse Guards, advancing to attack the French 



WAR AND PEACE 



cavalry that was coming to meet them. 

The Horse Guards were galloping, but still 
holding in their horses. Rost6v could already 
see their faces and heard the command: 
"Charge! "shouted by an officer who was urging 
his thoroughbred to full speed. Rost6v, fearing 
to be crushed or swept into the attack on the 
French, galloped along the front as hard as his 
horse could go, but still was not in time to avoid 
them. 

The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pock- 
marked fellow, frowned angrily on seeing Ros- 
t6v before him, with whom he would inevita- 
bly collide. This Guardsman would certainly 
have bowled Rost6v and his Bedouin over 
(Rost6v felt himself quite tiny and weak com- 
pared to these gigantic men and horses) had it 
not occurred to Rost6v to flourish his whip be- 
fore the eyes of the Guardsman's horse. The 
heavy black horse, sixteen hands high, shied, 
throwing back its ears; but the pockmarked 
Guardsman drove his huge spurs in violently, 
and the horse, flourishing its tail and extending 
its neck, galloped on yet faster. Hardly had the 
Horse Guards passed Rost6v before he heard 
them shout, "Hurrah!" and looking back saw 
that their foremost ranks were mixed up with 
some foreign cavalry with red epaulets, prob- 
ably French. He could see nothing more, for 
immediately afterwards cannon began firing 
from somewhere and smoke enveloped every- 
thing. 

At that moment, as the Horse Guards, hav- 
ing passed him, disappeared in the smoke, Ros- 
t6v hesitated whether to gallop after them or 
to go where he was sent. This was the brilliant 
charge of the Horse Guards that amazed the 
French themselves. Rost6v was horrified to 
hear later that of all that mass of huge and 
handsome men, of all those brilliant, rich 
youths, officers and cadets, who had galloped 
past him on their thousand-ruble horses, only 
eighteen were left after the charge. 

"Why should I envy them? My chance is not 
lost, ancUnaybe I shall see the Emperor imme- 
diately!" thojught Rost6v and galloped on. 

When he came level with the Foot Guards 
he noticed that about them and around them 
cannon balls were flying, of which he was 
aware not so much because he heard their 
sound as because he saw uneasiness on the sol- 
diers' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity 
on those of the officers. 

Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment 
of Foot Guards he heard a voice calling him 
by name. 



"Rost6v!" 

"What?" he answered, not recognizing Boris. 

"I say, we've been in the front line! Our reg- 
iment attacked!" said Boris with the happy 
smile seen on the faces of young men who have 
been under fire for the first time. 

Rost6v stopped. 

"Have you?" he said. "Well, how did it go?" 

"We drove them back!" said Boris with an- 
imation, growing talkative. "Can you imagine 
it?" and he began describing how the Guards, 
having taken up their position and seeing 
troops before them, thought they were Austri- 
ans, and all at once discovered from the cannon 
balls discharged by those troops that they were 
themselves in the front line and had unexpect- 
edly to go into action. RostcW without hearing 
Boris to the end spurred his horse. 

"Where are you off to?" asked Boris. 

"With a message to His Majesty." 

"There he is!" said Boris, thinking Rost6v 
had said "His Highness," and pointing to the 
Grand Duke who with his high shoulders and 
frowning brows stood a hundred paces away 
from them in his helmet and Horse Guards' 
jacket, shouting something to a pale, white- 
uniformed Austrian officer. 

"But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the 
commander in chief or the Emperor," said 
Rost6v, and was about to spur his horse. 

"Count! Count!" shouted Berg who ran up 
from the other side as eager as Boris. "Count! 
I am wounded in my right hand" (and he 
showed his bleeding hand with a handkerchief 
tied round it) "and I remained at the front. I 
held my sword in my left hand, Count. All oui 
family the von Bergs have been knights!" 

He said something more, but Rost6v did 
not wait to hear it and rode away. 

Having passed the Guards and traversed an 
empty space, Rostov, to avoid again getting in 
front of the first line as he had done when the 
Horse Guards charged, followed the line of 
reserves, going far round the place where the 
hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. 
Suddenly he heard musket fire quite close in 
front of him and behind our troops, where he 
could never have expected the enemy to be. 

"What can it be?" he thought. "The enemy 
in the rear of our army? Impossible!" And sud- 
denly he was seized by a panic of fear for him- 
self and for the issue of the whole battle. "But 
be that what it may," he reflected, "there is no 
riding round it now. I must look for the com- 
mander in chief here, and if all is lost it is for 
me to perish with the rest." 



BOOK THREE 



The foreboding of evil that had suddenly 
come over Rost6v was more and more con- 
firmed the farther he rode into the region be- 
hind the village of Pratzen, which was full of 
troops of all kinds. 

"What does it mean? What is it? Whom are 
they firing at? Who is firing?" Rost6v kept ask- 
ing as he came up to Russian and Austrian sol- 
diers running in confused crowds across his 
path. 

"The devil knowsl They've killed everybody! 
It's all up nowl" he was told in Russian, Ger- 
man, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who 
understood what was happening as little as he 
did. 

"Kill the Germans!" shouted one. 

"May the devil take them the traitors!" 

"Zum Henker diese Russen!" l muttered a 
German. 

Several wounded men passed along the road, 
and words of abuse, screams, and groans min- 
gled in a general hubbub, then the firing died 
down. Rost6v learned later that Russian and 
Austrian soldiers had been firing at one anoth- 
er. 

"My God! What does it all mean?" thought 
he. "And here, where at any moment the Em- 
peror may see them. . . . But no, these must be 
only a handful of scoundrels. It will soon be 
over, it can't be that, it can't be! Only to get 
past them quicker, quicker! " 

The idea of defeat and flight could not en- 
ter Rostov's head. Though he saw French can- 
non and French troops on the Pratzen Heights 
just where he had been ordered to look for the 
commander in chief, he could not, did not 
wish to, believe that. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

Rosx6v had been ordered to look for Kutuzov 
and the Emperor near the village of Pratzen. 
But neither they nor a single commanding of- 
ficer were there, only disorganized crowds of 
troops of various kinds. He urged on his al- 
ready weary horse to get quickly past these 
crowds, but the farther he went the more dis- 
organized they were. The highroad on which 
he had come out was thronged with caliches, 
carriages of all sorts, and Russian and Austri- 
an soldiers of all arms, some wounded and 
some not. This whole mass droned and jostled 
in confusion under the dismal influence of 
cannon balls flying from the French batteries 
stationed on the Pratzen Heights. 

"Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" 

1 "Hang these Russians!" 



Rost6v kept asking everyone he could stop 
but got no answer from anyone. 

At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forcec 
him to answer. 

"Eh, brother! They've all bolted long ago!' 
said the soldier, laughing for some reason anc 
shaking himself free. 

Having left that soldier who was evidently 
drunk, Rost6v stopped the horse of a batmar 
or groom of some important personage and be 
gan to question him. The man announcec 
that the Tsar had been driven in a carriage ai 
full speed about an hour before along thatver 
road and that he was dangerously wounded. 

"It can't be!" said Rost6v. "It must hav&lt; 
been someone else." 

"I saw him myself," replied the man with ; 
self-confident smile of derision. "I ought tc 
know the Emperor by now, after the times I'v&lt; 
seen him in Petersburg. I saw him just as I se&lt; 
you. . . . There he sat in the carriage as pale a 
any thing. How they made the four black horse 
fly! Gracious me, they did rattle past! It's tim&lt; 
I knew the Imperial horses and Ilya Ivdnych. 
don't think Ilya drives anyone except th&lt; 
Tsar!" 

Rost6v let go of the horse and was about t&lt; 
ride on, when a wounded officer passing by ad 
dressed him: 

"Who is it you want?" he asked. "The com 
mander in chief? He was killed by a cannoi 
ball struck in the breast before our regiment. 1 

"Not killed wounded!" another officer coi 
reeled him. 

"Who? Kutuzov?" asked Rost6v. 

"Not Kutuzov, but what's his name well 
never mind . . . there are not many left alive 
Go that way, to that village, all the command 
ers are there," said the officer, pointing to th&lt; 
village of Hosjeradek, and he walked on. 

Rost6v rode on at a footpace not knowin] 
why or to whom he was now going. The Em 
peror was wounded, the battle lost. It was im 
possible to doubt it now. Rost6v rode in th 
direction pointed out to him, in which he sa\ 
turrets and a church. What need to hurry 
What was he now to say to the Tsar or to Ku 
tiizov, even if they were alive and un wounded 

"Take this road, your honor, that way yoi 
will be killed at oncel" a soldier shouted t&lt; 
him. "They'd kill you there!" 

"Oh, what are you talking about?" said an 
other. "Where is he to go? That way is nearer. 

Rost6v considered, and then went in the di 
rection where they said he would be killed. 

"It's all the same now. If the Emperor i 



i6o 



WAR AND PEACE 



wounded, am I to try to save myself?" he 
thought. He rode on to the region where the 
greatest number of men had perished in flee- 
ing from Pratzen. The French had not yet oc- 
cupied that region, and the Russians the un- 
injured and slightly woundedhad left it long 
ago. All about the field, like heaps of manure 
on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen 
dead and wounded to each couple of acres. The 
wounded crept together in twos and threes and 
one could hear their distressing screams and 
groans, sometimes feigned or so it seemed to 
Rost6v. He put his horse to a trot to avoid see- 
ing all these suffering men, and he felt afraid- 
afraid not for his life, but for the courage he 
needed and which he knew would not stand 
the sight of these unfortunates. 

The French, who had ceased firing at this 
field strewn with dead and wounded where 
there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an 
adjutant riding over it trained a gun on him 
and fired several shots. The sensation of those 
terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses 
around him merged in Rost6v's mind into a 
single feeling of terror and pity for himself. 
He remembered his mother's last letter. "What 
would she feel," thought he, "if she saw me 
here now on this field with the cannon aimed 
at me?" 

In the village of Hosjeradek there were Rus- 
sian troops retiring from the field of battle, 
who though still in some confusion were less 
disordered. The French cannon did not reach 
there and the musketry fire sounded far away. 
Here everyone clearly saw and said that the 
battle was lost. No one whom Rost6v asked 
could tell him where the Emperor or Kuttizov 
was. Some said the report that the Emperor 
was wounded was correct, others that it was 
not, and explained the false rumor that had 
spread by the fact that the Emperor's carriage 
had really galloped from the field of battle 
with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal 
Count Tolst6y, who had ridden out to the bat- 
tlefield with others in the Emperor's suite. One 
officer told Rost6v that he had seen someone 
from headquarters behind the village to the 
left, and thither Rost6v rode, not hoping to 
find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. 
When he had ridden about two miles and had 
passed the last of the Russian troops, he saw, 
near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it, 
two men on horseback facing the ditch. One 
with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar 
to Rostov; the other on a beautiful chestnut 
horse (which Rost6v fancied he had seen be- 



fore) rode up to the ditch, struck his horse with 
his spurs, and giving it the rein leaped lightly 
over. Only a little earth crumbled from the 
bank under the horse's hind hoofs. Turning 
the horse sharply, he again jumped the ditch, 
and deferentially addressed the horseman with 
the white plumes, evidently suggesting that he 
should do the same. The rider, whose figure 
seemed familiar to Rost6v and involuntarily 
riveted his attention, made a gesture of refusal 
with his head and hand and by that gesture 
Rost6v instantly recognized his lamented and 
adored monarch. 

"But it can't be he, alone in the midst of this 
empty field 1" thought Rost6v. At that moment 
Alexander turned his head and Rost6v saw the 
beloved features that were so deeply engraved 
on his memory. The Emperor was pale, his 
cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the 
charm, the mildness of his features, was all the 
greater. Rost6v was happy in the assurance 
that the rumors about the Emperor being 
wounded were false. He was happy to be see- 
ing him. He knew that he might and even ought 
to go straight to him and give the message Dol- 
gorukov had ordered him to deliver. 

But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, 
and dares not utter the thoughts he has dreamed 
of for nights, but looks around for help or a 
chance of delay and flight when the longed-for 
moment comes and he is alone with her, so 
Rost6v, now that he had attained what he had 
longed for more than anything else in the 
world, did not know how to approach the Em- 
peror, and a thousand reasons occurred to him 
why it would be inconvenient, unseemly, and 
impossible to do so. 

"What I It is as if I were glad of a chance to 
take advantage of his being alone and de- 
spondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant 
or painful to him at this moment of sorrow; 
besides, what can I say to him now, when my 
heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the 
mere sight of him?" Not one of the innumer- 
able speeches addressed to the Emperor that 
he had composed in his imagination could he 
now recall. Those speeches were intended for 
quite other conditions, they were for the most 
part to be spoken at a moment of victory and 
triumph, generally when he was dying of 
wounds and the sovereign had thanked him 
for heroic deeds, and while dying he expressed 
the love his actions had proved. 

"Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his 
instructions for the right flank now that it is 
nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost? No, 



BOOK THREE 



161 



certainly I must not approach him, I must not 
intrude on his reflections. Better die a thou- 
sand times than risk receiving an unkind look 
or bad opinion from him," Rost6v decided; 
and sorrowfully and with a heart full of despair 
he rode away, continually looking back at the 
Tsar, who still remained in the same attitude 
of indecision. 

While Rost6v was thus arguing with him- 
self and riding sadly away, Captain von Toll 
chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing 
the Emperor at once rode up to him, offered 
his services, and assisted him to cross the ditch 
on foot. The Emperor, wishing to rest and feel- 
ing unwell, sat down under an apple tree and 
von Toll remained beside him. Rost6v from a 
distance saw with envy and remorse how von 
Toll spoke long and warmly to the Emperor 
and how the Emperor, evidently weeping, cov- 
ered his eyes with his hand and pressed von 
Toll's hand. 

"And I might have been in his place!" 
thought Rostov, and hardly restraining his 
tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in 
utter despair, not knowing where to or why he 
was now riding. 

His despair was all the greater from feeling 
that his own weakness was the cause of his grief. 

He might . . . not only might but should, 
have gone up to the sovereign. It was a unique 
chance to show his devotion to the Emperor 

and he had not made use of it "What have 

I done?" thought he. And he turned round 
and galloped back to the place where he had 
seen the Emperor, but there was no one be- 
yond the ditch now. Only some carts and car- 
riages were passing by. From one of the drivers 
he learned that Kutuzov's staff were not far off, 
in the village the vehicles were going to. Ros- 
tov followed them. In front of him walked Ku- 
tuzov's groom leading horses in horsecloths. 
Then came a cart, and behind that walked an 
old, bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked 
cap and sheepskin coat. 

"Tit! I say, Tit!" said the groom. 

"What?" answered the old man absent-mind- 
edly. 

"Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!" 

"Oh, you fool!" said the old man, spitting 
angrily. Some time passed in silence, and then 
the same joke was repeated. 

Before five in the evening the battle had 
been lost at all points. More than a hundred 
cannon were already in the hands of the French. 

Przebyszlwski and his corps had laid down 



their arms. Other columns after losing half 
their men were retreating in disorderly con- 
fused masses. 

The remains of Langeron's andDokhtiirov's 
mingled forces were crowding around thedams 
and banks of the ponds near the village of* 
Augesd. 

After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd 
Dam that a hot cannonade (delivered by the 
French alone) was still to be heard from nu- 
merous batteries ranged on the slopes of the 
Pratzen Heights, directed at our retreating 
forces. 

In the rearguard, Dokhtiirov and others ral- 
lying some battalions kept up a musketry fire 
at the French cavalry that was pursuing our 
troops. It was growing dusk. On the narrow 
Augesd Dam where for so many years the old 
miller had been accustomed tositinhistasseled 
cap peacefully angling, while his grandson, 
with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the floun- 
dering silvery fish in the watering can, on that 
dam over which for so many years Moravians 
in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully 
driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat 
and had returned dusty with flour whitening 
their carts on that narrow dam amid the wag- 
ons and the cannon, under the horses' hoofs 
and between the wagon wheels, men disfigured 
by fear of death now crowded together, crush- 
ing one another, dying, stepping over the dy- 
ing and killing one another, only to move on a 
few steps and be killed themselves in the same 
way. 

Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew com- 
pressing the air around, or a shell burst in the 
midst of that dense throng, killing some and 
splashing with blood those near them. 

D61okhov now an officer wounded in the 
arm, and on foot, with the regimental com- 
mander on horseback and some ten men of 
his company, represented all that was left of 
that whole regiment. Impelled by the crowd, 
they had got wedged in at the approach to the 
dam and, jammed in on all sides, had stopped 
because a horse in front had fallen under a 
cannon and the crowd were dragging it out. A 
cannon ball killed someone behind them, an- 
other fell in front and splashed D61okhov with 
blood. The crowd, pushing forward desperate- 
ly, squeezed together, moved a few steps, and 
again stopped. 

"Move on a hundred yards and we are cer- 
tainly saved, remain here another two minutes 
and it is certain death," thought each one. 

D61okhov who was in the midst of the crowd 



162 



WAR AND PEACE 



forced his way to the edge of the dam, throw- 
ing two soldiers off their feet, and ran onto the 
slippery ice that covered the millpool. 

"Turn this way!" he shouted, jumping over 
the ice which creaked under him; "turn this 
way!" he shouted to those with the gun. "It 
bears! . . ." 

The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, 
and it was plain that it would give way not on- 
ly under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon 
even under his weight alone. The men looked 
at him and pressed to the bank, hesitating to 
step onto the ice. The general on horseback at 
the entrance to the dam raised his hand and 
opened his mouth to address D61okhov. Sud- 
denly a cannon ball hissed so low above the 
crowd that everyone ducked. It flopped into 
something moist, and the general fell from his 
horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a 
look or thought of raising him. 

"Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! 
Turn! Don't you hear? Go on!" innumerable 
voices suddenly shouted after the ball had 
struck the general, the men themselves not 
knowing what, or why, they were shouting. 

One of the hindmost guns that was going 
onto the dam turned off onto the ice. Crowds 
of soldiers from the dam began running onto 
the frozen pond. The ice gave way under one 
of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slipped 
into the water. He tried to right himself but 
fell in up to his waist. The nearest soldiers 
shrank back, the gun driver stopped his horse, 
but from behind still came the shouts: "Onto 
the ice, why do you stop? Go on! Go on!" And 
cries of horror were heard in the crowd. The 
soldiers near the gun waved their arms and 
beat the horses to make them turn and move 
on. The horses moved off the bank. The ice, 
that had held under those on foot, collapsed 
in a great mass, and some forty men who were 
on it dashed, some forward and some back, 
drowning one another. 

Still the cannon balls continued regularly to 
whistle and flop onto the ice and into the wa- 
ter and oftenest of all among the crowd that 
covered the dam, the pond, and the bank. 

CHAPTER XIX 

ON THE PRATZEN HEIGHTS, where he had fallen 
with the flagstaff in his hand, lay Prince An- 
drew Bolk6nski bleeding profusely and un- 
consciously uttering a gentle, piteous, and 
childlike moan. 

Toward evening he ceased moaning and be- 
came quite still. He did not know how long 



his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again 
felt that he was alive and suffering from a burn- 
ing, lacerating pain in his head. 

"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not 
know till now, but saw today?" was his first 
thought. "And I did not know this suffering 
either," he thought. "Yes, I did not know any- 
thing, anything at all till now. But where am 
I?" 

He listened and heard the sound of approach- 
ing horses, and voices speaking French. He 
opened his eyes. Above him again was the same 
lofty sky with clouds that had risen and were 
floating still higher, and between them gleamed 
blue infinity. He did not turn his head and did 
not see those who, judging by the sound of 
hoofs and voices, had ridden up and stopped 
near him. 

It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides- 
de-camp. Bonaparte riding over the battlefield 
had given final orders to strengthen the bat- 
teries firing at the Augesd Dam and was look- 
ing at the killed and wounded left on the field. 

"Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking 
at a dead Russian grenadier, who, with his face 
buried in the ground and a blackened nape, 
lay on his stomach with an already stiffened 
arm flung wide. 

"The ammunition for the guns in position 
is exhausted, Your Majesty," said an adjutant 
who had come from the batteries that were fir- 
ing at Augesd. 

"Have some brought from the reserve," said 
Napoleon, and having gone on a few steps he 
stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his 
back with the flagstaff that had been dropped 
beside him. (The flag had already been taken 
by the French as a trophy.) 

"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he 
gazed at Bolk6nski. 

Prince Andrew understood that this was 
said of him and that it was Napoleon who said 
it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But 
he heard the words as he might have heard the 
buzzing of a fly. Not only did they not interest 
him, but he took no notice of them and at once 
forgot them. His head was burning, he felt 
himself bleeding to death, and he saw above 
him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. He 
knew it was Napoleon his hero but at that 
moment Napoleon seemed to him such a small, 
insignificant creature compared with what was 
passing now between himself and that lofty in- 
finite sky with the clouds flying over it. At that 
moment it meant nothing to him who might 
be standing over him, or what was said of him; 



he was only glad that people were standing 
near him and only wished that they would help 
him and bring him back to life, which seemed 
to him so beautiful now that he had today 
learned to understand it so differently. He col- 
lected all his strength, to stir and utter a sound. 
He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, 
sickly groan which aroused his own pity. 

"Ah! He is alive," said Napoleon. "Lift this 
young man up and carry him to the dressing 
station." 

Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet 
Marshal Lannes, who, hat in hand, rode up 
smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him 
on the victory. 

Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: 
he lost consciousness from the terrible pain of 
being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting 
while being moved, and the probing of his 
wound at the dressing station. He did not re- 
gain consciousness till late in the day, when 
with other wounded and captured Russian of- 
ficers he was carried to the hospital. During 
this transfer he felt a little stronger and was 
able to look about him and even speak. 

The first words he heard on coming to his 
senses were those of a French convoy officer, 
who said rapidly: "We must halt here: the Em- 
peror will pass here immediately; it will please 
him to see these gentlemen prisoners." 

"There are so many prisoners today, nearly 
the whole Russian army, that he is probably 
tired of them," said another officer. 

"All the samel They say this one is the com- 
mander of all the Emperor Alexander's 
Guards," said the first one, indicating a Rus- 
sian officer in the white uniform of the Horse 
Guards. 

Bolk6nski recognized Prince Repnin whom 
he had met in Petersburg society. Beside him 
stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer 
of the Horse Guards. 

Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, 
stopped his horse. 

"Which is the senior?" he asked, on seeing 
the prisoners. 

They named the colonel, Prince Repnfn. 

"You are the commander of the Emperor 
Alexander's regiment of Horse Guards?" asked 
Napoleon. 

"Icommandedasquadron," replied Repnin. 

"Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," 
said Napoleon. 

"The praise of a great commander is a sol- 
dier's highest reward," said Repnin. 

"I bestow it with pleasure," said Napoleon. 



BOOK THREE 163 

"And who is that young man beside you?" 



Prince Repnfn named Lieutenant Sukht- 
len. 

After looking at him Napoleon smiled. 

"He's very young to come to meddle with 
us." 

"Youth is no hindrance to courage," mut- 
tered Sukhtlen in a failing voice. 

"A splendid reply!" said Napoleon. "Young 
man, you will go far!" 

Prince Andrew, who had also been brought 
forward before the Emperor's eyes to complete 
the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract 
his attention. Napoleon apparently remem- 
bered seeing him on the battlefield and, ad- 
dressing him, again used the epithet "young 
man" that was connected in his memory with 
Prince Andrew. 

"Well, and you, young man," said he. "How 
do you feel, mon brave?" 

Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew 
had been able to say a few words to the sol- 
diers who were carrying him, now with his eyes 
fixed straight on Napoleon, he was silent. . . . 
So insignificant at that moment seemed to him 
all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so 
mean did his hero himself with his paltry 
vanity and joy in victory appear, compared to 
the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he 
had seen and understood, that he could not 
answer him. 

Every thing seemed so futile and insignificant 
in comparison with the stern and solemn train 
of thought that weakness from loss of blood, 
suffering, and the nearness of death aroused 
in him. Looking into Napoleon's eyes Prince 
Andrew thought of the insignificance of great- 
ness, the unimportance of life which no one 
could understand, and the still greater unim- 
portance of death, the meaning of which no 
one alive could understand or explain. 

The Emperor without waiting for an an- 
swer turned away and said to one of the officers 
as he went: "Have these gentlemen attended 
to and taken to my bivouac; let my doctor, Lar- 
rey, examine their wounds. Au revoir, Prince 
Repnfnl" and he spurred his horse and gal- 
loped away. 

His face shone with self-satisfaction and 
pleasure. 

The soldiers who had carried Prince An- 
drew had noticed and taken the little gold icon 
Princess Mary had hung round her brother's 
neck, but seeing the favor the Emperor showed 
the prisoners, they now hastened to return the 
holy image. 



164 



WAR AND PEACE 



Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom 
it was replaced, but the little icon with its thin 
gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest 
outside his uniform. 

"It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, 
glancing at the icon his sister had hung round 
his neck with such emotion and reverence, "it 
would be good if everything were as clear and 
simple as it seems to Mary. How good it would 
be to know where to seek for help in this life, 
and what to expect after it beyond the grave! 
How happy and calm I should be if I could now 
say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!' . . . But to 
whom should I say that? Either to a Power in- 
definable, incomprehensible, which I not only 
cannot address but which I cannot even ex- 
press in words the Great All or Nothing" 
said he to himself, "or to that God who has 



increased and he grew delirious. Visions of 
his father, wife, sister, and future son, and 
the tenderness he had felt the night before 
the battle, the figure of the insignificant little 
Napoleon, and above all this the lofty sky, 
formed the chief subjects of his delirious 
fancies. 

The quiet home life and peaceful happiness 
of Bald Hills presented itself to him. He was 
already enjoying that happiness when that lit- 
tle Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his 
unsympathizing look of shortsighted delight at 
the misery of others, and doubts and torments 
had followed, and only the heavens promised 
peace. Toward morningall these dreams melted 
and merged into the chaos and darkness of un- 
consciousenss and oblivion, which in the opin- 
ion of Napoleon's doctor, Larrey, was much 



been sewn into this amulet by Mary I/There is more likely to end in death than in convales- 



nothing certain, nothing at all except the un- 
importance of everything I understand, and 
the greatness of something incomprehensible 
but all-importantj 

The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he 
again felt unendurable pain; his feverishness 



cence. 

"He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Lar- 
rey, "and will not recover." 

And Prince Andrew, with others fatally 
wounded, was left to the care of the inhabit- 
ants of the district. 



Book Four: 1806 



CHAPTER I 

EARLY IN THE YEAR 1806 Nicholas Rost6v re- 
turned home on leave. Denisov was going home 
to Vor6nezh and Rost6v persuaded him to 
travel with him as far as Moscow and to stay 
with him there. Meeting a comrade at the last 
post station but one before Moscow, Denfsov 
had drunk three bottles of wine with him 
and, despite the jolting ruts across the snow- 
covered road, did not once wake up on the way 
to Moscow, but lay at the bottom of the sleigh 
beside Rost6v, who grew more and more im- 
patient the nearer they got to Moscow. 

"How much longer? How much longer? Oh, 
these insufferable streets, shops, bakers' sign- 
boards, street lamps, and sleighs!" thought 
Rost6v, when their leave permits had been 
passed at the town gate and they had entered 
Moscow. 

"Denfsov! We're here! He's asleep," he add- 
ed, leaning forward with his whole body as if 
in that position he hoped to hasten the speed 
of the sleigh. 

Denisov gave no answer. 

"There's the corner at the crossroads, where 
the cabman, Zakhar, has his stand, and there's 
Zakhar himself and still the same horse! And 
here's the little shop where we used to buy gin- 
gerbread! Can't you hurry up? Now then!" 

"Which house is it?" asked the driver. 

"Why, that one, right at the end, the big 
one. Don't you see? That's our house," said 
Rost6v. "Of course, it's our house! Denisov, 
Denfsov I We're almost there!" 

Denfsov raised his head, coughed, and made 
no answer. 

"Dmftri," said Rostov to his valet on the 
box, "those lights are in our house, aren't 
they?" 

"Yes, sir, and there's a light in your father's 
study." 

"Then they've not gone to bed yet? What do 
you think? Mind now, don't forget to put out 
my new coat," added Rostdv, fingering his new 
mustache. "Now then, get on," he shouted to 



the driver. "Do wake up, Vdska!" he went on, 
turning to Denfsov, whose head was again nod- 
ding. "Come, get on! You shall have three ru- 
bles for vodka get on!" Rost6v shouted, when 
the sleigh was only three houses from his door. 
It seemed to him the horses were not moving 
at all. At last the sleigh bore to the right, drew 
up at an entrance, and Rost6v saw overhead 
the old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster 
broken off, the porch, and the post by the side 
of the pavement. He sprang out before the 
sleigh stopped, and ran into the hall. The 
house stood cold and silent, as if quite regard- 
less of who had come to it. There was no one 
in the hall. "Oh God! Is everyone all right?" 
he thought, stopping for a moment with a sink- 
ing heart, and then immediately starting to 
run along the hall and up the warped steps of 
the familiar staircase. The well-known old door 
handle, which always angered the countess 
when it was not properly cleaned, turned as 
loosely as ever. A solitary tallow candle burned 
in the anteroom. 

Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prok6- 
fy, the footman, who was so strong that he 
could lift the back of the carriage from behind, 
sat plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges. He 
looked up at the opening door and his expres- 
sion of sleepy indifference suddenly changed 
to one of delighted amazement. 

"Gracious heavens! The young count!" he 
cried, recognizing his young master. "Can it 
be? My treasure!" and Prok6fy, trembling 
with excitement, rushed toward the drawing- 
room door, probably in order to announce 
him, but, changing his mind, came back and 
stooped to kiss the young man's shoulder. 

"All well?" asked Rost6v, drawing away his 
arm. 

"Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They've just 
finished supper. Let me have a look at you, 
your excellency." 

"Is everything quite all right?" 

"The Lord be thanked, yes!" 

Rost6v, who had completely forgotten Denf- 



165 



i66 



WAR AND PEACE 



sov, not wishing anyone to forestall him, threw 
off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the 
large dark ballroom. All was the same: there 
were the same old card tables and the same 
chandelier with a cover over it; but someone 
had already seen the young master, and, be- 
fore he had reached the drawing room, some- 
thing flew out from a side door like a tornado 
and began hugging and kissing him. Another 
and yet another creature of the same kind 
sprang from a second door and a third; more 
hugging, more kissing, more outcries, and tears 
of joy. He could not distinguish which was 
Papa, which Natdsha, and which Ptya. Every- 
one shouted, talked, and kissed him at the 
same time. Only his mother was not there, he 
noticed that. 

"And I did not know . . . Nicholas . . . My 
darling! . . ." 

"Here he is ... our own . . . K61ya, a dear fel- 
low . . . How he has changed! . . . Where are 
the candles? . . . Tea! . . ." 

"And me, kiss me!" 

"Dearest . . . and mel" 

S6nya, Natdsha, Pdtya, Anna Mikhdylovna, 
Ve*ra, and the old count were all hugging him, 
and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the 
room, exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing. 

Pe*tya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, 
"And me too!" 

Natdsha, after she had pulled him down to- 
ward her and covered his face with kisses, hold- 
ing him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang 
away and pranced up and down in one place 
like a goat and shrieked piercingly. 

All around were loving eyes glistening with 
tears of joy, and all around were lips seeking a 
kiss. 

S6nya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, 
radiant with bliss, looked eagerly toward his 
eyes, waiting for the look for which she longed. 
S6nya now was sixteen and she was very pretty, 
especially at this moment of happy, rapturous 
excitement. She gazed at him, not taking her 
eyes off him, and smiling and holding her 
breath. He gave her a grateful look, but was 
still expectant and looking for someone. The 
old countess had not yet come. But now steps 
were heard at the door, steps so rapid that they 
could hardly be his mother's. 

Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which 
he did not know, made since he had left. All 
the others let him go, and he ran to her. When 
they met, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She 
could not lift her face, but only pressed it to 

Nicholas. 



the cold braiding of his hussar's jacket. Denf* 
sov, who had come into the room unnoticed by 
anyone, stood there and wiped his eyes at the 
sight. 

"Vasili Denfsov, your son's friend," he said, 
introducing himself to the count, who was 
looking inquiringly at him. 

"You are most welcome! I know, I know," 
said the count, kissing and embracing Denisov. 
"Nicholas wrote us ... Natdsha, Vera, look! 
Here is Denfsovl" 

The same happy, rapturous faces turned to 
the shaggy figure of Denisov. 

"Darling Denfsovl" screamed Natdsha, be- 
side herself with rapture, springing to him, 
putting her arms round him, and kissing him. 
This escapade made everybody feel confused. 
Denfsov blushed too, but smiled and, taking 
Natdsha's hand, kissed it. 

Denfsov was shown to the room prepared 
for him, and the Rostovs all gathered round 
Nicholas in the sitting room. 

The old countess, not letting go of his hand 
and kissing it every moment, sat beside him: 
the rest, crowding round him, watched every 
movement, word, or look of his, never taking 
their blissfully adoring eyes off him. His broth- 
er and sisters struggled for the places nearest 
to him and disputed with one another who 
should bring him his tea, handkerchief, and 
pipe. 

Rost6v was very happy in the love they 
showed him; but the first moment of meeting 
had been so beatific that his present joy seemed 
insufficient, and he kept expecting something 
more, more and yet more. 

Next morning, after the fatigues of their 
journey, the travelers slept till ten o'clock. 

In the room next their bedroom there was a 
confusion of sabers, satchels, sabretaches, open 
portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshly 
cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed 
by the wall. The servants were bringing in 
jugs and basins, hot water for shaving, and 
their well-brushed clothes. There was a mascu- 
line odor and a smell of tobacco. 

"Hallo, Gwfska my pipe!" came Vasili 
Denfsov's husky voice. "Wost6v, get up!" 

Rost6v, rubbing his eyes that seemed glued 
together, raised his disheveled head from the 
hot pillow. 

"Why, is it late?" 

"Late! It's nearly ten o'clock," answered Na- 
tdsha's voice. A rustle of starched petticoats 
and the whispering and laughter of girls' voices 
came from the adjoining room. The door was 



BOOK FOUR 



167 



opened a crack and there was a glimpse of 
something blue, of ribbons, black hair, and 
merry faces. It was Natasha, S6nya, and Pdtya, 
who had come to see whether they were get- 
ting up. 

"Nicholas! Get up!" Natasha's voice was 
again heard at the door. 

"Directly!" 

Meanwhile, Pe" tya, having found and seized 
the sabers in the outer room, with the delight 
boys feel at the sight of a military elder broth- 
er, and forgetting that it was unbecoming for 
the girls to see men undressed, opened the bed- 
room door. 

"Is this your saber?" he shouted. 

The girls sprang aside. Denfsov hid his hairy 
legs under the blanket, looking with a scared 
face at his comrade for help. The door, having 
let Ptya in, closed again. A sound of laughter 
came from behind it. 

"Nicholas! Come outinyourdressinggownl" 
said Natasha's voice. 

"Is this your saber?" asked Pe*tya. "Or is it 
yours?" he said, addressing the black-mustached 
Denisov with servile deference. 

Rost6v hurriedly put something on his feet, 
drew on his dressing gown, and went out. Na- 
tasha had put on one spurred boot and was 
just getting her foot into .the other. S6nya, 
when he came in, was twirling round and was 
about to expand her dresses into a balloon and 
sit down. They were dressed alike, in new pale- 
blue frocks, and were both fresh, rosy, and 
bright. S6nya ran away, but Natdsha, taking 
her brother's arm, led him into the sitting 
room, where they began talking. They hardly 
gave one another time to ask questions and 
give replies concerning a thousand little mat- 
ters which could not interest anyone but them- 
selves. Natasha laughed at every word he said 
or that she said herself, not because what they 
were saying was amusing, but because she felt 
happy and was unable to control her joy which 
expressed itself by laughter. 

"Oh, how nice, how splendid!" she said to 
everything. 

Rost6v felt that, under the influence of the 
warm rays of love, that childlike smile which 
had not once appeared on his face since he left 
home now for the first time after eighteen 
months again brightened his soul and his face. 

"No, but listen," she said, "now you are 
quite a man, aren't you? I'm awfully glad you're 
my brother." She touched his mustache. "I 
want to know what you men are like. Are you 
the same as we? No?" 



"Why did S6nya run away?" asked Rost6v. 

"Ah, yes! That's a whole long story! How 
are you going to speak to her thou or you?" 

"As may happen," said Rost6v. 

"No, call her you, please! I'll tell you all 
about it some other time. No, I'll tell you now. 
You know S6nya's my dearest friend. Such a 
friend that I burned my arm for hersake.Look 
here!" 

She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed 
him a red scar on her long; slender, delicate 
arm, high above the elbow on that part that is 
covered even by a ball dress. 

"I burned this to prove my love for her. I just 
heated a ruler in the fire and pressed it there!" 

Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions 
on its arms, in what used to be his old school- 
room, and looking into Natasha's wildly bright 
eyes, Rostov re-entered that world of home and 
childhood which had no meaning for anyone 
else, but gave him some of the best joys of his 
life; and the burning of an arm with a ruler as 
a proof of love did not seem to him senseless, 
he understood and was not surprised at it. 

"Well, and is that all?" he asked. 

"We are such friends, such friends! All that 
ruler business was just nonsense, but we are 
friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does 
it for life, but I don't understand that, I forget 
quickly." 

"Well, what then?" 

"Well, she loves me and you like that." 

Natiisha suddenly flushed. 

"Why, you remember before you went away? 

. . . Well, she says you are to forget all that 

She says: 'I shall love him always, but let him 
be free.' Isn't that lovely and noble! Yes, very 
noble? Isn't it?" asked Natasha, so seriously 
and excitedly that it was evident that what she 
was now saying she had talked of before, with 
tears. 

Rost6v became thoughtful. 

"I never go back on my word," he said. "Be- 
sides, S6nya is so charming that only a fool 
would renounce such happiness." 

"No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I have al- 
ready talked it over. We knew you'd s,ay so. 
But it won't do, because you see, if you say 
that if you consider yourself bound by your 
promise it will seem as if she had not meant 
it seriously. It makes it as if you were marrying 
her because you must, and that wouldn't do at 
all." 

Rost6v saw that it had been well considered 
by them. S6nya had already struck him by her 
beauty on the preceding day. Today, when he 



i68 



WAR AND PEACE 



had caught a glimpse of her, she seemed still 
more lovely. She was a charming girl of six- 
teen, evidently passionately in love with him 
(he did not doubt that for an instant). Why 
should he not love her now, and even marry 
her, Rost6v thought, but just now there were 
so many other pleasures and interests before 
him! "Yes, they have taken a wise decision," he 
thought, "I must remain free." 

"Well then, that's excellent," said he. "We'll 
talk it over later on. Oh, how glad I am to have 
you! 

"Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he 
continued. 

"Oh, what nonsense!" cried Natdsha, laugh- 
ing. "I don't think about him or anyone else, 
and I don't want anything of the kind." 

"Dear me I Then what are you up to now?" 

"Now?" repeated Natdsha, and a happy smile 
lit up her face. "Have you seen Duport?" 

"No." 

"Not seen Duport the famous dancer? Well 
then, you won't understand. That's what I'm 
up to." 

Curving her arms, Natdsha held out her 
skirts as dancers do, ran back a few steps, 
turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet 
sharply together, and made some steps on the 
very tips of her toes. 

"See, I'm standing! See!" she said, but could 
not maintain herself on her toes any longer. 
"So that's what I'm up tol I'll never marry any- 
one, but will be a dancer. Only don't tell any- 
one." 

Rost6v laughed so loud and merrily that 
Denisov, in his bedroom, felt envious and Na- 
tdsha could not help joining in. 

"No, but don't you think it's nice?" she kept 
repeating. 

"Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry 
Boris?" 

Natdsha flared up. "I don't want to marry 
anyone. And I'll tell him so when I see him!" 

"Dear me!" said Rost6v. 

"But that's all rubbish," Natdsha chattered 
on. "And is Denfsov nice?" she asked. 

"Yes, indeed!" 

"Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he 
very terrible, Denisov?" 

"Why terrible?" asked Nicholas. "No, Vdska 
is a splendid fellow." 

"You call him Vdska? That's funny! And is 
he very nice?" 

"Very." 

"Well then, be quick. We'll all have break- 
fast together." 



And Natdsha rose and went out of the room 
on tiptoe, like a ballet dancer, but smiling as 
only happy girls of fifteen can smile. When 
Rost6v met S6nya in the drawing room, he red- 
dened. He did not know how to behave with 
her. The evening before, in the first happy mo- 
ment of meeting, they had kissed each other, 
but today they felt it could not be done; he felt 
that everybody, including his mother and sis- 
ters, was looking inquiringly at him and watch- 
ing to see how he would behave with her. He 
kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou 
but as you Sdnya. But their eyes met and said 
thou, and exchanged tender kisses. Her looks 
asked him to forgive her for having dared, by 
Natdsha's intermediacy, to remind him of his 
promise, and then thanked him for his love. 
His looks thanked her for offering him his free- 
dom and told her that one way or another he 
would never cease to love her, for that would 
be impossible. 

"How strange it is," said Wra, selecting a 
moment when all were silent, "that S6nya and 
Nicholas now say you to one another and meet 
like strangers." 

V^ra's remark was correct, as her remarks al- 
ways were, but, like most of her observations, 
it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not only 
S6nya, Nicholas, .and Natdsha, but even the 
old countess, who dreading this love affair 
which might hinder Nicholas from making a 
brilliant match blushed like a girl. 

Denfsov, to Rost6v's surprise, appeared in 
the drawing room with pomaded hair, per- 
fumed, and in a new uniform, looking just as 
smart as he made himself when going into bat- 
tle, and he was more amiable to the ladies and 
gentlemen than Rost6v had ever expected to 
see him. 

CHAPTER II 

ON HIS RETURN to Moscow from the army, 
Nicholas Rost6v was welcomed by his home cir- 
cle as the best of sons, a hero, and their darling 
Nik61enka; by his relations as a charming, at- 
tractive, and polite youngman; by his acquaint- 
ances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars, a 
good dancer, and one of the best matches in 
the city. 

The Rost6vs knew everybody in Moscow. 
The old count had money enough that year, 
as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so 
Nicholas, acquiring a trotter of his own, very 
stylish riding breeches of the latest cut, such as 
no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of 
the latest fashion, with extremely pointed toes 



BOOK FOUR 



169 



and small silver spurs, passed his time very 
gaily. After a short period of adapting himself 
to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it 
very pleasant to be at home again. He felt that 
he had grown up and matured very much. His 
despair at failing in a Scripture examination, 
his borrowing money from Gavrfl to pay a 
sleigh driver, his kissing S6nya on the sly he 
now recalled all this as childishness he had left 
immeasurably behind. Now he was a lieuten- 
ant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, and 
wearing the Cross of St. George, awarded to 
soldiers for bravery in action, and in the com- 
pany of well-known, elderly, and respected rac- 
ing men was training a trotter of his own for a 
race. He knew a lady on one of the boulevards 
whom he visited of an evening. He led the 
mazurka at the Arkhdrovs' ball, talked about 
the war with Field Marshal Kdmenski, visited 
the English Club, and was on intimate terms 
with a colonel of forty to whom Denisov had 
introduced him. 

His passion for the Emperor had cooled 
somewhat in Moscow. But still, as he did not 
see him and had no opportunity of seeing him, 
he often spoke about him and about his love 
for him, letting it be understood that he had 
not told all and that there was something in 
his feel ings for the Emperor not everyone could 
understand, and with his whole soul he shared 
the adoration then common in Moscow for the 
Emperor, who was spoken of as the "angel in- 
carnate." 

During Rost6v's short stay in Moscow, before 
rejoining the army, he did not draw closer to 
S6nya, but rather drifted away from her. She 
was very pretty and sweet, and evidently deep- 
ly in love with him, but he was at the period of 
youth when there seems so much to do that 
there is no time for that sort of thing and a 
young man fears to bind himself and prizes 
his freedom which he needs for so many other 
things. When he thought of S6nya, during this 
stay in Moscow, he said to himself, "Ah, there 
will be, and there are, many more such girls 
somewhere whom I do not yet know. There 
will be time enough to think about love when 
I want to, but now I have no time." Besides, 
it seemed to him that the society of women was 
rather derogatory to his manhood. He went to 
balls and into ladies' society with an affectation 
of doing so against his will. The races, the 
English Club, sprees with Denisov, and 
visits to a certain housethat was another 
matter and quite the thing for a dashing 
young hussarl 



At the beginning of March, old Count 
Rost6v was very busy arranging a dinner in 
honorof Prince Bagrati6n at the English Club. 

The count walked up and down the hall in 
his dressing gown, giving orders to the club 
steward and to the famous Feoktfst, the Club's 
head cook, about asparagus, fresh cucumbers, 
strawberries, veal, and fish for this dinner. The 
count had been a member and on the commit- 
tee of the Club from the day it was founded. To 
him the Club entrusted theaVrangement of the 
festival in honor of Bagrati6n, for few men 
knew so well how to arrange a feast on an open- 
handed, hospitable scale, and still fewer men 
would be so well able and willing to make up 
out of their own resources what might be need- 
ed for the success of the fete. The club cook and 
the steward listened to the count's orders with 
pleased faces, for they knew that under no oth- 
er management could they so easily extract a 
good profit for themselves from a dinner cost- 
ing several thousand rubles. 

"Well then, mind and have cocks' combs in 
the turtle soup, you know!" 

"Shall we have three cold dishes then?" asked 
the cook. 

The count considered. 

"We can't have lessyes, three . . . the may- 
onnaise, that's one," said he, bending down a 
finger. 

"Then am I to order those large sterlets?" 
asked the steward. 

"Yes, it can't be helped if they won't take 
less. Ah, dear me! I was forgetting. We must 
have another entree. Ah, goodness gracious!" 
he clutched at his head. "Who is going to get 
me the flowers? Dmftri! Eh, Dmitri 1 Gallop off 
to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum 
who appeared at his call. "Hurry off and tell 
Maksim, the gardener, to set the serfs to work. 
Say that everything out of the hothouses must 
be brought here well wrapped up in felt. I must 
have two hundred pots here on Friday." 

Having given several more orders, he was 
about to go to his "little countess" to have a 
rest, but remembering something else of im- 
portance, he returned again, called back the 
cook and the club steward, and again began 
giving orders. A light footstep and the clinking 
of spurs were heard at the door, and the young 
count, handsome, rosy, with a dark little mus- 
tache, evidently rested and made sleeker by his 
easy life in Moscow, entered the room. 

"Ah, my boy, my head's in a whirl!" said the 
old man with a smile, as if he felt a little con- 
fused before his son, "Now, if you would only 



170 



WAR AND PEACE 



help a bit! I must have singers too. I shall have 
my own orchestra, but shouldn't we get the 
gypsy singers as well? You military men like 
that sort of thing." 

"Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagrati6n 
worried himself less before the battle of Schon 
Grabern than you do now," said his son with 
a smile. 

The old count pretended to be angry. 

"Yes, you talk, but try it yourself!" 

And the count turned to the cook, who, with 
a shrewd and respectful expression, looked ob- 
servantly and sympathetically at the father and 
son. 

"What have the young people come to now- 
adays, eh, Feoktist?" said he. "Laughing at us 
old fellows!" 

"That's so, your excellency, all they have to 
do is to eat a good dinner, but providing it and 
serving it all up, that's not their business!" 

"That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, 
and gaily seizing his son by both hands, he 
cried, "Now I've got you, so take the sleigh 
and pair at once, and go to Bezukhob's, and 
tell him 'Count Ilyd has sent you to ask for 
strawberries and fresh pineapples.' We can't 
get them from anyone else. He's not there him- 
self, so you'll have to go in and ask the prin- 
cesses; and from there go on to the Rasgulyay 
the coachman Ipdtka knows and look up 
the gypsy Ilyushka, the one who danced at 
Count Orl6v's, you remember, in a white Cos- 
sack coat, and bring him along to me." 

"And am I to bring the gypsy girls along 
with him?" asked Nicholas, laughing. "Dear, 
dear! . . ." 

At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and 
with the businesslike, preoccupied, yet meekly 
Christian look which never left her face, Anna 
MikMylovna entered the hall. Though she 
came upon thecount in his dressing gown every 
day, he invariably became confused and 
begged her to excuse his costume. 

"No matter at all, my dear count," she said, 
meekly closing her eyes. "But I'll go to Bezuk- 
hov's myself. Pierre has arrived, and now we 
shall get anything we want from his hothouses. 
I have to see him in any case. He has forward- 
ed me a letter from Boris. Thank God, Boris 
is now on the staff." 

The count was delighted at Anna Mikhay- 
lovna's taking upon herself one of his com- 
missions and ordered the small closed carriage 
for her. 

"Tell Bezukhov to come. I'll put his name 
down. Is bis wife with him?" he asked. 



Anna Mikhdylovna turned up her eyes, and 
profound sadness was depicted on her face. 

"Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," 
she said. "If what we hear is true, it is dreadful. 
How little we dreamed of such a thing when 
we were rejoicing at his happiness! And such 
a lofty angelic soul as young Bezukhovl Yes, I 
pity him from my heart, and shall try to give 
him what consolation I can." 

"Wh-what is the matter?" asked both the 
young and old Rostov. 

Anna Mikhdylovna sighed deeply. 

"D61okhov, Mary Ivdnovna's son," she said 
in a mysterious whisper, "has compromised her 
completely, they say. Pierre took him up, in- 
vited him to his house in Petersburg, and now 
... she has come here and that daredevil after 
her!" said Anna Mikhylovna, wishing to show 
her sympathy for Pierre, but by involuntary 
intonations and a half smile betraying her 
sympathy for the "daredevil," as she called 
Ddlokhov. "They say Pierre is quite broken by 
his misfortune." 

"Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the 
Club it will all blow over. It will be a tre- 
mendous banquet." 

Next day, the third of March, soon after one 
o'clock, two hundred and fifty members of the 
English Cluband fifty guests were awaiting the 
guest of honor and hero of the Austrian cam- 
paign, Prince Bagrati6n, to dinner. 

On the first arrival of the news of the battle 
of Austerlitz, Moscow had been bewildered. At 
that time, the Russians were so used to victories 
that on receiving news of the defeat some 
would simply not believe it, while others sought 
some extraordinary explanation of so strange 
an event. In the English Club, where all who 
were distinguished, important, and well in- 
formed forgathered when the news began to 
arrive in December, nothing was said about the 
war and the last battle, as though all were in a 
conspiracy of silence. The men who set the tone 
in conversation Count Rostopchin, Prince 
Yuri Dolgortikov, Valiiev, Count Mdrkov, and 
Prince Vyazemski did not show themselves at 
the Club, but met in private houses in inti- 
mate circles, and the Moscovites who took 
their opinions from others Ilya Rost6v among 
them remained for a while without any defi- 
nite opinion on the subject of the war and 
without leaders. The Moscovites felt that some- 
thing was wrong and that to discuss the bad 
news was difficult, and so it was best to be si- 
lent. But after a while, just as a jury comes out 
of its room, the bigwigs who guided the Club's 



BOOK FOUR 



171 



opinion reappeared, and everybody began 
speaking clearly and definitely. Reasons were 
found for the incredible! unheard-of, and im- 
possible event of a Russian defeat, everything 
became clear, and in all corners of Moscow 
the same things began to be said. These reasons 
were the treachery of the Austrians, a defective 
commissariat, the treachery of the Pole Przeby- 
szwski and of the Frenchman Langeron, Ku- 
tuzov's incapacity, and (it was whispered) the 
youth and inexperience of the sovereign, who 
had trusted worthless and insignificant people. 
But the army, the Russian army, everyone de- 
clared, was extraordinary and had achieved 
miracles of valor. The soldiers, officers, and gen- 
erals were heroes. But the hero of heroes was 
Prince Bagrati6n, distinguished by his Schon 
Grabern affair and by the retreat from Auster- 
litz, where he alone had withdrawn his col- 
umn unbroken and had all day beaten back an 
enemy force twice as numerous as his own. 
What also conduced to Bagrati6n's being se- 
lected as Moscow's hero was the fact that he 
had no connections in the city and was a stran- 
ger there. In his person, honor was shown to a 
simple fighting Russian soldier without con- 
nections and intrigues, and to one who was as- 
sociated by memories of the Italian campaign 
with the name of Suv6rov. Moreover, paying 
such honor to Bagrati6n was the best way of 
expressing disapproval and dislike of Kutiizov. 

"Had there been no Bagrati6n, it would 
have been necessary to invent him," said the 
wit Shinshfn, parodying the words of Voltaire. 
Kutiizov no one spoke of, except some who 
abused him in whispers, calling him a court 
weathercock and an old satyr. 

All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgonikov's 
saying: "If you go on modeling and model- 
ing you must get smeared with clay," suggest- 
ing consolation for our defeat by the memory 
of former victories; and the words of Rostop- 
chfn, that French soldiers have to be incited to 
battle by highfalutin words, and Germans by 
logical arguments to show them that it is more 
dangerous to run away than to advance, but 
that Russian soldiers only need to be restrained 
and held back! On all sides, new and fresh an- 
ecdotes were heard of individual examples of 
heroism shown by our officers and men at Aus- 
terlitz. One had saved a standard, another had 
killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five 
cannon singlehanded. Berg was mentioned, by 
those who did not know him, as having, when 
wounded in the right hand, taken his sword in 
the left, and gone forward. Of Bolk6nski, noth- 



ing was said, and only those who knew him in- 
timately regretted that he had died so young, 
leaving a pregnant wife with his eccentric 
father. 

CHAPTER III 

ON THAT third of March, all the rooms in the 
English Club were filled with a hum of conver- 
sation, like the hum of beesswarming in spring- 
time. The members and guests of the Club 
wandered hither and thither, sat, stood, met, 
and separated, some in uniform and some in 
evening dress, and a few here and there with 
powdered hair and in Russian kaftdns. Pow- 
dered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes 
and smart stockings, stood at every door anx- 
iously noting visitors' every movement in order 
to offer their services. Most of those present 
were elderly, respected men with broad, self- 
confident faces, fat fingers, and resolute ges- 
tures and voices. This class of guests and mem- 
bers sat in certain habitual places and met in 
certain habitual groups. A minority of those 
present were casual guests chiefly young men, 
among whom were Denfsov, Rostov, and D6- 
lokhov who was now again an officer in the 
Semenov regiment. The faces of these young 
people, especially those who were militarymen, 
bore that expression of condescending respect 
for their elders which seems to say to the older 
generation, "We are prepared to respect and 
honor you, but all the same remember that the 
future belongs to us." 

Nesvf tski was there as an old member of the 
Club. Pierre, who at his wife's command had 
let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles, 
went about the rooms fashionably dressed but 
looking sad and dull. Here, as elsewhere, he 
was surrounded by an atmosphere of subser- 
vience to his wealth, and being in the habit of 
lording it over these people, he treated them 
with absent-minded contempt. 

By his age he should have belonged to the 
younger men, but by his wealth and connec- 
tions he belonged to the groups of old and hon- 
ored guests, and so he went from one group to 
another. Some of the most important old men 
were the center of groups which even strangers 
approached respectfully to hear the voices of 
well-known men. The largest circles formed 
round Count Rostopchfn, Valtiev, and Nary- 
shkin. Rostopchfn was describing how the Rus- 
sians had been overwhelmed by flying Austri- 
ans and had had to force their way through 
them with bayonets. 

Valiiev was confidentially telling that Uvdrov 



WAR AND PEACE 



had been sent from Petersburg to ascertain 
what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz. 

In the third circle, Naryshkin was speaking 
of the meeting of the Austrian Council of War 
at which Suv6rov crowed like a cock in reply to 
the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. 
Shinshfn, standing close by, tried to make a 
joke, saying that Kutuzov had evidently failed 
to learn from Suv6roveven so simple a thing as 
the art of crowing like a cock, but the elder 
members glanced severely at the wit, making 
him feel that in that place and on that day, it 
was improper to speak so of Kutuzov. 

Count Ilyd Rost6v, hurried and preoccupied, 
went about in his soft boots between the din- 
ing and drawing rooms, hastily greeting the 
important and unimportant, all of whom he 
knew, as if they were all equals, while his eyes 
occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up 
young son, resting on him and winking joyful- 
ly at him. Young Rost6v stood at a window 
with Dolokhov, whose acquaintance he had 
lately made and highly valued. The old count 
came up to them and pressed D61okhov's hand. 

"Please come and visit us ... you know my 
brave boy . . . been together out there . . . both 
playing the hero . . . Ah, Vasfli Igndtovich . . . 
How d'ye do, old fellow?" he said, turning to 
an old man who was passing, but before he had 
finished his greeting there was a general stir, 
and a footman who had run in announced, 
with a frightened face: "He's arrived!" 

Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, and 
like rye shaken together in a shovelthe 
guests who had been scattered about in differ- 
ent rooms came together and crowded in the 
large drawing room by the door of the ball- 
room. 

Bagrati6n appeared in the doorway of the 
anteroom without hat or sword, which, in ac- 
cord with the Club custom, he had given up to 
the hall porter. He had no lambskin cap on his 
head, nor had he a loaded whip over his shoul- 
der, as when Rost6v had seen him on the eve 
of the battle of Austerlitz, but wore a tight new 
uniform with Russian and foreign Orders, and 
the Star of St. George on his left breast. Evi- 
dently just before coming to the dinner he had 
had his hair and whiskers trimmed, which 
changed his appearance for the worse. There 
was something naively festive in his air, which, 
in con junction with his firm and virile features, 
gave him a rather comical expression. Bekle- 
she*v and Theodore Uvdrov, who had arrived 
with him, paused at the doorway to allow him, 
as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagrati6n 



was embarrassed, not wishing to avail himself 
of their courtesy, and this caused some delay 
at the doors, but after all he did at last enter 
first. He walked shyly and awkwardly over the 
parquet floor of the reception room, not know- 
ing what to do with his hands; he was more ac- 
customed to walk over a plowed field under 
fire, as he had done at the head of the Kursk 
regiment at Schon Grabern and he would 
have found that easier. The committeemen met 
him at the first door and, expressing their de- 
light at seeing such a highly honored guest, 
took possession of him as it were, without wait- 
ing for his reply, surrounded him, and led 
him to the drawing room. It was at first impos- 
sible to enter the drawing-room door for the 
crowd of members and guests jostling one an- 
other and trying to get a good look at Bagrati6n 
over each other's shoulders, as if he were some 
rare animal. Count Ilyd Rost6v, laughing and 
repeating the words, "Make way, dear boy! 
Make way, make way!" pushed through the 
crowd more energetically than anyone, led the 
guests into the drawing room, and seated them 
on the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most re- 
spected members of the Club, beset the new ar- 
rivals. Count Ilya, again thrusting his way 
through the crowd, went out of the drawing 
room and reappeared a minute later with an- 
other committeeman, carrying a large silver sal- 
ver which hepresented to Prince Bagrati6n.On 
the salver lay some verses composed and print- 
ed in the hero's honor. Bagrati6n, on seeing the 
salver,glanced around in dismay, as though seek- 
ing help. But all eyes demanded that he should 
submit. Feeling himself in their power, he res- 
olutely took the salver with both hands and 
looked sternly and reproachfully at the count 
who had presented it to him. Someone oblig- 
ingly took the dish from Bagrati6n (or he 
would, it seemed, have held it till evening and 
have gone in to dinner with it) and drew his 
attention to the verses. 

"Well, I will read them, then!" Bagrati6n 
seemed to say, and, fixing his weary eyes on the 
paper, began to read them with a fixed and 
serious expression. But the author himself took 
the verses and began reading them aloud. Ba- 
grati6n bowed his head and listened: 

Bring glory then to Alexander's reign 

And on the throne our Titus shield. 

A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man, 

A Rhipheus at home, a Caesar in the field! 

E'en fortunate Napoleon 

Knows by experience f now, Bagratidn, 

And dare not Herculean Russians trouble. . . . 



BOOK FOUR 

But before he had finished reading, a stentori- 
an major-domo announced that dinner was 
ready! The door opened, and from the din- 
ing room came the resounding strains of the 
polonaise: 



173 



Conquest's joyful thunder waken, 
Triumph, valiant Russians, now! . . . 

and Count Rost6v, glancing angrily at the au- 
thor who went on reading his verses, bowed to 
Bagrati6n. Everyone rose, feeling that dinner 
was more important than verses, and Bagrati6n, 
again preceding all the rest, went in to dinner. 
He was seated in the place of honor between 
two Alexanders Bekleshev and Naryshkin 
which was a significant allusion to the name of 
the sovereign. Three hundred persons took 
their seats in the dining room, according to 
their rank and importance: the more impor- 
tant nearer to the honored guest, as naturally 
as water flows deepest where the land lies low- 
est. 

Just before dinner, Count Ilya Rost6v pre- 
sented his son to Bagrati6n, who recognized 
him and said a few words to him, disjointed 
and awkward, as were all the words he spoke 
that day, and Count Ilya looked joyfully and 
proudly around while Bagrati6n spoke to his 
son. 

Nicholas Rost6v, with Denisov and his new 
acquaintance, D61okhov, sat almost at the mid- 
dle of the table. Facing them sat Pierre, beside 
Prince Nesvitski. Count Ilya Rost6v with the 
other members of the committee sat facing Ba- 
grati6n and, as the very personification of 
Moscow hospitality, did the honors to the 
prince. 

His efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, 
both the Lenten and the other fare, was splen- 
did, yet he could not feel quite at ease till the 
end of the meal. He winked at the butler, whis- 
pered directions to the footmen, and awaited 
each expected dish with some anxiety. Every- 
thing was excellent. With the second course, a 
gigantic sterlet (at sight of which Ilya Rost6v 
blushed with self-conscious pleasure), the foot- 
men began popping corks and filling the cham- 
pagne glasses. After the fish, which made a cer- 
tain sensation, the count exchanged glances 
with the other committeemen. "There will be 
many toasts, it's time to begin," he whispered, 
and taking up his glass, he rose. All were silent, 
waiting for what he would say. 

"To the health of our Sovereign, the Em- 
peror!" he cried, and at the same moment his 
kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and 



enthusiasm. The band immediately struck up 
"Conquest's joyful thunder waken . . ." All 
rose and cried "Hurrah!" Bagrati6n also rose 
and shouted "Hurrah!" in exactly the same 
voice in which he had shouted it on the field 
at Schon Grabern. Young Rost6v's ecstatic 
voice could be heard above the three hundred 
others. He nearly wept. "To the health of our 
Sovereign , the Emperor ! " he roared, ' 'Hurrah ! ' ' 
and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed 
it to the floor. Many followed his example, and 
the loud shouting continued for a long time. 
When the voices subsided, the footmen cleared 
away the broken glass and everybody sat down 
again, smiling at the noise they had made and 
exchanging remarks. The old count rose once 
more, glanced at a note lying beside his plate, 
and proposed a toast, "To the health of the 
hero of our last campaign, Prince Peter Ivano- 
vich Bagrati6nl" and again his blue eyes grew 
moist. "Hurrah!" cried the three hundred 
voices again, but instead of the band a choir 
began singing a cantata composed by Paul 
Ivanovich Kutuzov: 

Russians! O'er all barriers on! 

Courage conquest guarantees; 

Have we not Bagratidnf 

He brings foemen to their knees, . . . etc. 

As soon as the singing was over, another and 
another toast was proposed and Count Ilyd 
Rost6v became more and more moved, more 
glass was smashed, and the shouting grew loud- 
er. They drank to Bekleshev, Naryshkin, Uv- 
rov, Dolgoriikov, Aprdksin, Valiiev, to thecom- 
mittee, to all the Club members and to all the 
Club guests, and finally to Count Ilya Rost6v 
separately, as the organizer of the banquet. At 
that toast, the count took out his handkerchief 
and, covering his face, wept outright. 

CHAPTER IV 

PIERRE SAT OPPOSITE D61okhov and Nicholas 
Rost6v. As usual, he ate and drank much, and 
eagerly. But those who knew him intimately 
noticed that some great change had come over 
him that day. He was silent all through dinner 
and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, 
with fixed eyes and a look of complete absent- 
mindedness, kept rubbing the bridge of his 
nose. His face was depressed and gloomy. He 
seemed to see and hear nothing of what was 
going on around him and to be absorbed by 
some depressing and unsolved problem. 

The unsolved problem that tormented him 
was caused by hints given by the princess, his 
cousin, at Moscow, concerning D61okhov's 



WAR AND PEACE 



intimacy with his wife, and by an anonymous 
letter he had received that morning, which in 
the mean jocular way common to anonymous 
letters said that he saw badly through his spec- 
tacles, but that his wife's connection with D61- 
okhov was a secret to no one but himself. 
Pierre absolutely disbelieved both the princess* 
hints and the letter, but he feared now to look 
at D61okhov, who was sitting opposite him. 
Every time he chanced to meet Drilokhov's 
handsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt something 
terrible and monstrous rising in his soul and 
turned quickly away. Involuntarily recalling 
his wife's past and her relations with D61okhov, 
Pierre saw clearly that what was said in the let- 
ter might be true, or might at least seem to be 
true had it not referred to his wife. He invol- 
untarily remembered how D61okhov, who had 
fully recovered his former position after the 
campaign, had returned to Petersburg and 
come to him. Availing himself of his friendly 
relations with Pierre as a boon companion, 
D6Iokhov had come straight to his house, and 
Pierre had put him up and lent him money. Pi- 
erre recalled how Hlne had smilingly ex- 
pressed disapproval of D61okhov's living at 
their house, and how cynically Dolokhov had 
praised his wife's beauty to him and from that 
time till they came to Moscow had not left 
them for a day. 

"Yes, he is very handsome," thought Pierre, 
"and I know him. It would be particularly 
pleasant to him to dishonor my name and rid- 
icule me, just because I have exerted myself on 
his behalf, befriended him, and helped him. I 
know and understand what a spice that would 
add to the pleasure of deceiving me, if it real- 
ly were true. Yes, if it were true, but I do not 
believe it. I have no right to, and can't, believe 
it." He remembered the expression Dolokhov's 
face assumed in his moments of cruelty, as 
when tying the policeman to the bear and 
dropping them into the water, or when he chal- 
lenged a man to a duel without any reason, or 
shot a post-boy's horse with a pistol. That ex- 
pression was often on D61okhov's face when 
looking at him. "Yes, he is a bully," thought 
Pierre, "to kill a man means nothing to him. 
It must seem to him that everyone is afraid of 
him, and that must please him. He must think 
that I, too, am afraid of him and in fact I am 
afraid of him/' he thought, and again he felt 
something terrible and monstrous rising in his 
soul. D61okhov, Denisov, and Rost6vwere now 
sitting opposite Pierre and seemed very gay. 
Rost6v was talking merrily to his two friends, 



one of whom was a dashing hussar and the oth- 
er a notorious duelist and rake, and every now 
and then he glanced ironically at Pierre, whose 
preoccupied, absent-minded, and massive fig- 
ure was a very noticeable one at the dinner. 
Rost6v looked inimically at Pierre, first be- 
cause Pierre appeared to his hussar eyes as a 
rich civilian, the husband of a beauty, and in 
a word an old woman; and secondly because 
Pierre in his preoccupation and absent-mind- 
edness had not recognized Rostov and had not 
responded to his greeting. When the Emperor's 
health was drunk, Pierre, lost in thought, did 
not rise or lift his glass. 

"What are you about?" shouted Rost6v, look- 
ing at him in an ecstacyof exasperation. "Don't 
you hear it's His Majesty the Emperor's health?" 

Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his 
glass, and, waiting till all were seated again, 
turned with his kindly smile to Rostov. 

"Why, I didn't recognize you!" he said. But 
Rost6v was otherwise engaged; he was shout- 
ing "Hurrah!" 

"Why don't you renew the acquaintance?" 
said D61okhov to Rost6v. 

"Confound him, he's a fool!" said Rost6v. 

"One should make up to the husbands of 
pretty women," said Denisov. 

Pierre did not catch what they were saying, 
but knew they were talking about him. He red- 
dened and turned away. 

"Well, now to the health of handsome wom- 
en!" said D61okhov, and with a serious expres- 
sion, but with a smile lurking at the corners of 
his mouth, he turned with his glass to Pierre. 

"Here's to the health of lovely women, Pe- 
tcrkin and their lovers!" he added. 

Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his 
glass without looking at D61okhov or answer- 
ing him. The footman, who was distributing 
leaflets with Kutuzov's cantata, laid one before 
Pierre as one of the principal guests. He was 
just going to take it when D61okhov, leaning 
across, snatched it from his hand and began 
reading it. Pierre looked at D61okhov and his 
eyes dropped, the something terrible and mon- 
strous that had tormented him all dinnertime 
rose and took possession of him. He leaned his 
whole massive body across the table. 

"How dare you take it?" he shouted. 

Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was 
addressed, Nesvitski and the neighbor on his 
right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov. 

"Don't! Don't! What are you about?" whis- 
pered their frightened voices. 

D61okhov looked at Pierre with clear, mirth- 



BOOK FOUR 



ful, cruel eyes, and that smile of his which 
seemed to say, "Ah! This is what I like!" 

"You shan't have it!" he said distinctly. 

Pale, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the 
copy. 

"You . . . ! you . . . scoundrel! I challenge 
you!" he ejaculated, and, pushing back his 
chair, he rose from the table. 

At the very instant he did this and uttered 
those words, Pierre felt that the question of his 
wife's guilt which had been tormenting him the 
whole day was finally and indubitably answered 
in the affirmative. He hated her and was for- 
ever sundered from her. Despite Denisov's re- 
quest that he would take no part in the matter, 
Rost6v agreed to be Dolokhov's second, and 
after dinner he discussed the arrangements for 
the duel with Nesvitski, Beziikhov's second. 
Pierre went home, but Rost6v with Dolokhov 
and Denfsov stayed on at the Club till late, 
listening to the gypsies and other singers. 

"Well then, till tomorrow at Sok61niki,"said 
D61okhov, as he took leave of Rostov in the 
Club porch. 

"And do you feel quite calm?" Rost6v asked. 

D61okhov paused. 

"Well, you see, I'll tell you the whole secret 
of dueling in two words. If you are going to 
fight a duel, and you make a will and write af- 
fectionate letters to your parents, and if you 
think you may be killed, you are a fool and are 
lost for certain. But go with the firm intention 
of killing your man as quickly and surely as 
possible, and then all will be right, as our bear 
huntsman at Kostromd used to tell me. 'Every- 
one fears a bear/ he says, 'but when you see one 
your fear's all gone, and your only thought is 
not to let^him get away!' And that's how it is 
with me. A demain, mon cher" * 

Next day, at eight in the morning, Pierre 
and Nesvftski drove to the Sok61niki forest and 
found D61okhov, Denfsov, and Rost6v already 
there. Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied 
with considerations which had no connection 
with the matter in hand. His haggard face was 
yellow. He had evidently not slept that night. 
He looked about distractedly and screwed up 
his eyes as if dazzled by the sun. He was entirely 
absorbed by two considerations: his wife's 
guilt, of which after his sleepless night he had 
not the slightest doubt, and the guiltlessness of 
D61okhov, who had no reason to preserve the 

honor of a man who was nothing to him "I 

should perhaps have done the same thing in his 
place," thought Pierre. "It's even certain that 

1 Till tomorrow, my dear fellow. 



I should have done the same, then why this 
duel, this murder? Either I shall kill him, or he 
will hit me in the head, or elbow, or knee. Can't 
I go away from here, run away, bury myself 
somewhere?" passed through his mind. But just 
at moments when such thoughts occurred to 
him, he would ask in a particularly calm and 
absent-minded way, which inspired the respect 
of the onlookers, "Will it be long? Are things 
ready?" 

When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the 
snow to mark the barriers, and the pistols load- 
ed, Nesvitski went up to Pierre. 

"I should not be doing my duty, Count," he 
said in timid tones, "and should not justify 
your confidence and the honor you have done 
me in choosing me for your second, if at this 
grave, this very grave, moment I did not tell 
you the whole truth. I think there is no suffi- 
cient ground for this affair, or for blood to be 
shed over it. ... You were not right, not quite 
in the right, you were impetuous . . ." 

"Oh yes, it is horribly stupid," said Pierre. 

"Then allow me to express your regrets, and 
I am sure your opponent will accept them," 
said Nesvftski (who like the others concerned 
in the affair, and like everyone in similar cases, 
did not yet believe that the affair had come to 
an actual duel). "You know, Count, it is much 
more honorable to admit one's mistake than to 
let matters become irreparable. There was no 
insult on either side. Allow me to convey . . ." 

"No! What is there to talk about?" said Pi- 
erre. "It'sall the same Is every thing ready?" 

he added. "Only tell me where to go and where 
to shoot," he said with an unnaturally gentle 
smile. 

He took the pistol in his hand and began ask- 
ing about the working of the trigger, as he had 
not before held a pistol in his hand a fact 
that he did not wish to confess. 

"Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot," 
said he. 

"No apologies, none whatever," said D61o- 
khov to Denfsov (who on his side had been at- 
tempting a reconciliation), and he also went 
up to the appointed place. 

The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty 
paces from the road, where the sleighs had 
been left, in a small clearing in the pine forest 
covered with melting snow, the frost having 
begun to break up during the last few days. 
The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the 
farther edge of the clearing. The seconds, meas- 
uring the paces, left tracks in the deep wet 
snow between the place where they had been 



176 



WAR AND PEACE 



standingand Nesvftski'sand D61okhov's sabers, 
which were stuck into the ground ten paces 
apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing and 
misty; at forty paces' distance nothing could 
be seen. For three minutes all had been ready, 
but they still delayed and all were silent. 

CHAPTER V 
"WELL, BEGIN!" said D61okhov. 

"All right," said Pierre, still smiling in the 
same way. A feeling of dread was in the air. It 
was evident that the affair so lightly begun 
could no longer be averted but was taking its 
course independently of men's will. 

Denisov first went to the barrier and an- 
nounced: "As the adve'sawies have wefused a 
weconciliation, please pwoceed.Take your pis- 
tols, and at the word thwee begin to advance. 

"O-ne! T-wol Thwee!" he shouted angrily 
and stepped aside. 

The combatants advanced along the trodden 
tracks, nearer and nearer to one another, be- 
ginning to see one another through the mist. 
They had the right to fire when they liked as 
they approached the barrier. D61okhov walked 
slowly without raising his pistol, looking in- 
tently with his bright, sparkling blue eyes into 
his antagonist's face. His mouth wore its usual 
semblance of a smile. 

"So I can fire when I like!" said Pierre, and 
at the word "three," he went quickly forward, 
missing the trodden path and stepping into the 
deep snow. He held the pistol in his right hand 
at arm's length, apparently afraid of shooting 
himself with it. His left hand he held careful- 
ly back, because he wished to support his right 
hand with it and knew he must not do so. Hav- 
ing advanced six paces and strayed off the track 
into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet, 
then quickly glanced at D61okhov and, bend- 
ing his finger as he had been shown, fired. Not 
at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre shud- 
dered at the sound and then, smiling at his own 
sensations, stood still. The smoke, rendered 
denser by the mist, prevented him from seeing 
anything for an instant, but there was no second 
report as he had expected. He only heard D6- 
lokhov's hurried steps, and his figure came in 
view through the smoke. He was pressing one 
hand to his left side, while the other clutched 
his drooping pistol. His face was pale. Rost6v 
ran toward him and said something. 

"No-o-o!" muttered D61okhov through his 
teeth, "no, it's not over." And after stumbling 
a few staggering steps right up to the saber, he 
sank on the snow beside it. His left hand was 



bloody; he wiped it on his coat and supported 
himself with it. His frowning face was pallid 
and quivered. 

"Plea ..." began D61okhov, but could not at 
first pronounce the word. 

"Please," he uttered with an effort. 

Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began 
running toward D61okhov and was about to 
cross the space between the barriers, when D6- 
lokhov cried: 

"To your barrier! "and Pierre, grasping what 
was meant, stopped by his saber. Only ten paces 
divided them. D61okhov lowered his head to 
the snow, greedily bit at it, again raised his 
head, adjusted himself, drew in his legs and sat 
up, seeking a firm center of gravity. He sucked 
and swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered, 
but his eyes, still smiling, glittered with effort 
and exasperation as he mustered his remaining 
strength. He raised his pistol and aimed. 

"Sideways! Cover yourself with your pistol!" 
ejaculated Nesvitski. 

"Cover yourself!" even Denisov cried to his 
adversary. 

Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and re- 
morse, his arms and legs helplessly spread out, 
stood with his broad chest directly facing D6- 
lokhovand looked sorrowfully at him. Dcnfsov, 
Rostov, and Nesvitski closed their eyes. At the 
same instant they heard a report and Dolo- 
khov's angry cry. 

"Missed!" shouted Dolokhov, and he lay 
helplessly, face downwards on the snow. 

Pierre clutched his temples, and turning 
round went into the forest, trampling through 
the deep snow, and muttering incoherent 
words: 

"Folly . . . folly! Death . . . lies . . ." he re- 
peated, puckering his face. 

Nesvf tski stopped him and took him home. 

Rost6v and Denisov drove away with the 
wounded D61okhov. 

The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed 
eyes and did not answer a word to the ques- 
tions addressed to him. But on entering Mos- 
cow he suddenly came to and, lifting his head 
with an effort, took Rost6v, who was sitting be- 
side him, by the hand. Rost6v was struck by the 
totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous 
and tender expression on Ddlokhov's face. 

"Well? How do you feel?" he asked. 

"Bad! But it's not that, my friend "said D61- 
okhov with a gasping voice. "Where are we? In 
Moscow, I know. I don't matter, but I have 
killed her, killed . . . She won't get over it! She 
won't survive. . . ." 



BOOK FOUR 



177 



"Who?" asked Rost6v. 

"My mother! My mother, my angel, my 
adored angel mother," and D61okhov pressed 
Rostov's hand and burst into tears. 

When he had become a little quieter, he ex- 
plained to Rost6v that he was living with his 
mother, who, if she saw him dying, would not 
survive it. He implored Rost6v to go on and 
prepare her. 

Rost6v went on ahead to do what was asked, 
and to his great surprise learned that D61okhov 
the brawler, D61okhov the bully, lived in Mos- 
cow with an old mother and a hunchback sis- 
ter, and was the most affectionate of sons and 
brothers. 

CHAPTER VI 

PIERRE HAD of late rarely seen his wife alone. 
Both in Petersburg and in Moscow their house 
was always full of visitors. The night after the 
duel he did not go to his bedroom but, as he 
often did, remained in his father's room, that 
huge room in which Count Bezukhovhad died. 

He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall 
asleep and forget all that had happened to him, 
but could not do so. Such a storm of feelings, 
thoughts, and memories suddenly arose within 
him that he could not fall asleep, nor even re- 
main in one place, but had to jump up and 
pace the room with rapid steps. Now he seemed 
to see her in the early days of their marriage, 
with bare shoulders and a languid, passionate 
look on her face, and then immediately he saw 
beside her D61okhov's handsome, insolent, 
hard, and mocking face as he had seen it at the 
banquet, and then that same face pale, quiver- 
ing, and suffering, as it had been when he reeled 
and sank on the snow. 

"What has happened?" he asked himself. "I 
have killed her lover, yes, killed my wife's lover. 
Yes, that was it! And why? How did I come to 
do it?" "Because you married her," answered 
an inner voice. 

"But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In 
marrying her without loving her; in deceiving 
yourself and her." And he vividly recalled that 
moment after supper at Prince Vasili's, when 
he spoke those words he had found so difficult 
to utter: "I love you." "It all comes from that! 
Even then I felt it," he thought. "I felt then 
that it was not so, that I had no right to do it. 
And so it turns out." 

He remembered his honeymoon and blushed 
at the recollection. Particularly vivid, humili- 
ating, and shameful was the recollection of 
how one day soon after his marriage he came 



out of the bedroom into his study a little be- 
fore noon in his silk dressing gown and found 
his head steward there, who, bowing respect- 
fully, looked into his face and at his dressing 
gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing re- 
spectful understanding of his employer's hap- 
piness. 

"But how often I have felt proud of her, 
proud of her majestic beauty and social tact," 
thought he; "been proud of my house, in 
which she received all Petersburg, proud of 
her unapproachability and beauty. So this is 
what I was proud of! I then thought that I did 
not understand her. How often when consider- 
ing her character I have told myself that I was 
to blame for not understanding her, for not 
understanding that constant composure and 
complacency and lack of all interests or desires, 
and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth 
that she is a depraved woman. Now I have 
spoken that terrible word to myself all has be- 
come clear. 

"Anatole used to come to borrow money 
from her and used to kiss her naked shoulders. 
She did not give him the money, but let her- 
self be kissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse 
her jealousy, and she replied with a calm smile 
that she was not so stupid as to be jealous: 'Let 
him do what he pleases,' she used to say of me. 
One day I asked her if she felt any symptoms 
of pregnancy. She laughed contemptuously and 
said she was not a fool to want to have chil- 
dren, and that she was not going to have any 
children by me." 

Then he recalled the coarseness and blunt- 
ness of her thoughts and the vulgarity of the 
expressions that were natural to her, though 
she had been brought up in the most aristo- 
cratic circles. 

"I'm not such a fool. . . . Just you try it on. 
. . . Allez-vous promener/' 1 she used to say. 
Often seeing the success she had with young 
and old men and women Pierre could not un- 
derstand why he did not love her. 

"Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself; 
"I knew she was a depraved woman," he re- 
peated, "but dared not admit it to myself. And 
now there's D61okhov sitting in the snow with 
a forced smile and perhaps dying, while meet- 
ing my remorse with some forced bravado!" 

Pierre was one of those people who, in spite 
of an appearance of what is called weak char- 
acter, do not seek a confidant in their troubles. 
He digested his sufferings alone. 

"It is all, all her fault," he said to himself; 

1 "You clear out of this." 



i 7 8 



WAR AND PEACE 



"but what of that? Why did I bind myself to 
her? Why did I say 'Je vous aime' l to her, 
which was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am 
guilty and must endure . . . what? A slur on 
my name? A misfortune for life? Oh, that's 
nonsense," he thought. "The slur on my name 
and honor that's all apart from myself. 

"Louis XVI was executed because they said 
he was dishonorable and a criminal," came in- 
to Pierre's head, "and from their point of view 
they were right, as were those too who canon- 
ized him and died a martyr's death for his sake. 
Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a 
despot. Who is right and who is wrong? No 
one! But if you are alive live: tomorrow you'll 
die as I might have died an hour ago. And is it 
worth tormenting oneself, when one has only 
a moment of life in comparison with eternity?" 

But at the moment when he imagined him- 
self calmed by such reflections, she suddenly 
came into his mind as she was at the moments 
when he had most strongly expressed his in- 
sincere love for her, and he felt the blood rush 
to his heart and had again to get up and move 
about and break and tear whatever came to his 
hand. "Why did I tell her that 'Je vous aime'?" 
he kept repeating to himself. And when he 
had said it for the tenth time, Molire's words: 
"Mais que diable alloit-il faire dans cette ga- 
leref" * occurred to him, and he began to laugh 
at himself. 

In the night he called his valet and told him 
to pack up to go to Petersburg. He could not 
imagine how he could speak to her now. He 
resolved to go away next day and leave a letter 
informing her of his intention to part from 
her forever. 

Next morning when the valet came into the 
room with his coffee, Pierre was lying asleep 
on the ottoman with an open book in his hand. 

He woke up and looked round for a while 
with a startled expression, unable to realize 
where he was. 

"The countess told me to inquire whether 
your excellency was at home," said the valet. 

But before Pierre could decide what answer 
he would send, the countess herself in a white 
satin dressing gown embroidered with silver 
and with simply dressed hair (two immense 
plaits twice round her lovely head like a coro- 
net) entered the room, calm and majestic, ex- 
cept that there was a wrathful wrinkle on her 

1 1 love you. 

8 "What the dickens did he get himself into that 
mess for?" or, more literally, "What the devil was 
he going to do in that galley?" TR. 



rather prominent marble brow. With her im- 
perturbable calm she did not begin to speak in 
front of the valet. She knew of the duel and 
had come to speak about it. She waited till the 
valet had set down the coffee things and left 
the room. Pierre looked at her timidly over his 
spectacles, and like a hare surrounded by 
hounds who lays back her ears and continues 
to crouch motionless before her enemies, he 
tried to continue reading. But feeling this to 
be senseless and impossible, he again glanced 
timidly at her. She did not sit down but looked 
at him with a contemptuous smile, waiting for 
the valet to go. 

"Well, what's this now? What have you been 
up to now, I should like to know?" she asked 
sternly. 

"I? What have I . . . ?" stammered Pierre. 

"So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, 
what was this duel about? What is it meant to 
prove? What? I ask you." 

Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman 
and opened his mouth, but could not reply. 

"If you won't answer, I'll tell you... "Hellene 
went on. "You believe everything you're told. 
You were told . . ." Hdene laughed, "that D6- 
lokhov was my lover," she said in French with 
her coarse plainness of speech, uttering the 
word amant as casually as any otherword, "and 
you believed it! Well, what have you proved? 
What does this duel prove? That you're a fool, 
que vous lies un sot, but everybody knew that. 
What will be the result? That I shall be the 
laughingstock of all Moscow, that everyone 
will say that you, drunk and not knowing what 
you were about, challenged a man you are 
jealous of without cause." Helene raised her 
voice and became more and more excited, "A 
man who's a better man than you in every 
way . . ." 

"Hm . . . Hm . . . !" growled Pierre, frown- 
ing without looking at her, and not moving a 
muscle. 

"And how could you believe he was my 
lover? Why? Because I like his company? If 
you were cleverer and more agreeable, I should 
prefer yours." 

"Don't speak to me ... I beg you," muttered 
Pierre hoarsely. 

"Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I 
like, and I tell you plainly that there are not 
many wives with husbands such as you who 
would not have taken lovers (des amants), but 
I have not done so," said she. 

Pierre wished to say something, looked at 
her with eyes whose strange expression she did 



BOOK FOUR 



179 



not understand, and lay down again. He was 
suffering physically at that moment, there was 
a weight on his chest and he could not breathe. 
He knew that he must do something to put an 
end to this suffering, but what he wanted to do 
was too terrible. 

"We had better separate," he muttered in a 
broken voice. 

"Separate? Very well, but only if you give 
me a fortune," said H61ne. "Separate! That's 
a thing to frighten me with!" 

Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed 
staggering toward her. 

"I'll kill you!" he shouted, and seizing the 
marble top of a table with a strength he had 
never before felt, he made a step toward her 
brandishing the slab. 

Hlne's face became terrible, she shrieked 
and sprang aside. His father's nature showed 
itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and de- 
light of frenzy. He flung down the slab, broke 
it, and swooping down on her with outstretched 
hands shouted, "Get out!" in such a terrible 
voice that the whole house heard it with hor- 
ror. God knows what he would have done at 
that moment had H^lene not fled from the 
room. 

A week later Pierre gave his wife full power 
to control all his estates in Great Russia, which 
formed the larger part of his property, and left 
for Petersburg alone. 

CHAPTER VII 

Two MONTHS had elapsed since the news of 
the battle of Austerlitz and the loss of Prince 
Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite 
of the letters sent through the embassy and all 
the searches made, his body had not been 
found nor was he on the list of prisoners. What 
was worst of all for his relations was the fact 
that there was still a possibility of his having 
been picked up on the battlefield by the peo- 
ple of the place and that he might now be ly- 
ing, recovering or dying, alone among stran- 
gers and unable to send news of himself. The 
gazettes from which the old prince first heard 
of the defeat at Austerlitz stated, as usual very 
briefly and vaguely, that after brilliant engage- 
ments the Russians had had to retreat and had 
made their withdrawal in perfect order. The 
old prince understood from this official report 
that our army had been defeated. A week after 
the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz 
came a letter from Kutiizov informing the 
prince of the fate that had befallen his son. 



"Your son," wrote Kutiizov, "fell before my 
eyes, a standard in his hand and at the head of 
a regiment he fell as a hero, worthy of his fa- 
ther and his fatherland. To the great regret of 
myself and of the whole army it is still uncer- 
tain whether he is alive or not. I comfort my- 
self and you with the hope that your son is 
alive, for otherwise he would have been men- 
tioned among the officers found on the field of 
battle, a list of whom has been sent me under 
flag of truce." 

After receiving this news late in the evening, 
when he was alone in his study, the old prince 
went for his walk as usual next morning, but 
he was silent with his steward, the gardener, 
and the architect, and though he looked very 
grim he said nothing to anyone. 

When Princess Mary went to him at the us- 
ual hour he was working at his lathe and, as 
usual, did not look round at her. 

"Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an 
unnatural voice, throwing down his chisel. 
(The wheel continued to revolve by its own 
impetus, and Princess Mary long remembered 
the dying creak of that wheel, which merged 
in her memory with what followed.) 

She approached him, saw his face, and some- 
thing gave way within her. Her eyes grew dim. 
By the expression of her father's face, not sad, 
not crushed, but angry and working unnatural- 
ly, she saw that hanging over her and about to 
crush her was some terrible misfortune, the 
worst in life, one she had not yet experienced, 
irreparable and incomprehensible the death 
of one she loved. 

"Father! Andrew!" said the ungraceful, 
awkward princess with such an indescribable 
charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that 
her father could not bear her look but turned 
away with a sob. 

"Bad news! He's not among the prisoners 
nor among the killed! Kutuzov writes . . ." and 
he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to 
drive the princess away by that scream . . . 
"Killed!" 

The princess did not fall down or faint. She 
was already pale, but on hearing these words 
her face changed and something brightened in 
her beautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joy a 
supreme joy apart from the joys and sorrows of 
this world overflowed the great grief within 
her. She forgot all fear of her father, went up 
to him, took his hand, and drawing him down 
put her arm round his thin, scraggy neck. 

"Father," she said, "do not turn away from 
me, let us weep together." 



i8o 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Scoundrels! Blackguards 1" shrieked the old 
man, turning his face away from her. "Destroy- 
ing the army, destroying the men! And why? 
Go, go and tell Lise." 

The princess sank helplessly into an arm- 
chair beside her father and wept. She saw her 
brother now as he had been at the moment 
when he took leave of her and of Lise, his look 
tender yet proud. She saw him tender and 
amused as he was when he put on the little 
icon. "Did he believe? Had he repented of his 
unbelief? Was he now there? There in the 
realms of eternal peace and blessedness?" she 
thought. 

"Father, tell me how it happened," she asked 
through her tears. 

"Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of 
Russian men and Russia's glory were led to de- 
struction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tell Lise. 
I will follow." 

When Princess Mary returned from her fa- 
ther, the little princess sat working and looked 
up with that curious expression of inner, hap- 
py calm peculiar to pregnant women. It was 
evident that her eyes did not see Princess Mary 
but were looking within . . . into herself ... at 
something joyful and mysterious taking place 
within her. 

"Mary," she said, moving away from the 
embroidery frame and lying back, "give me 
your hand." She took her sister-in-law's hand 
and held it below her waist. 

Her eyes were smilingexpectantly, her downy 
lip rose and remained lifted in childlike hap- 
piness. 

Princess Mary knelt down before her and 
hid her face in the folds of her sister-in-law's 
dress. 

"There, there! Do you feel it? I feel so 
strange. And do you know, Mary, I am going 
to love him very much," said Lise, looking 
with bright and happy eyes at her sister-in-law. 

Princess Mary could not lift her head, she 
was weeping. 

"What is the matter, Mary?" 

"Nothing . . . only I feel sad . . . sad about 
Andrew," she said, wiping away her tears on 
her sister-in-law's knee. 

Several times in the course of the morning 
Princess Mary began trying to prepare her sis- 
ter-in-law, and every time began to cry. Unob- 
servant as was the little princess, these tears, 
the cause of which she did not understand, 
agitated her. She said nothing but looked 
about uneasily as if in search of something. Be- 
fore dinner the old prince, of whom she was 



always afraid, came into her room with a pe- 
culiarly restless and malign expression and 
went out again without saying a word. She 
looked at Princess Mary, then sat thinking for 
a while with that expression of attention to 
something within her that is only seen in preg- 
nant women, and suddenly began to cry. 

"Has anything come from Andrew?" she 
asked. 

"No, you know it's too soon for news. But 
my father is anxious and I feel afraid." 

"So there's nothing?" 

"Nothing," answered Princess Mary, look- 
ing firmly with her radiant eyes at her sister-in- 
law. 

She had determined not to tell her and per- 
suaded her father to hide the terrible news 
from her till after her confinement, which was 
expected within a few days. Princess Mary and 
the old prince each bore and hid their grief in 
their own way. The old prince would not cher- 
ish any hope: he made up his mind that Prince 
Andrew had been killed, and though he sent 
an official to Austria to seek for traces of his 
son, he ordered a monument from Moscow 
which he intended to erect in his own garden 
to his memory, and he told everybody that his 
son had been killed. He tried not to change his 
former way of life, but his strength failed him. 
He walked less, ate less, slept less, and became 
weaker every day. Princess Mary hoped. She 
prayed for her brother as living and was al- 
ways awaiting news of his return. 

CHAPTER VIII 

DEAREST," said the little princess after break- 
fast on themorningof thenineteenthof March, 
and her downy little lip rose from old habit, 
but as sorrow was manifest in every smile, the 
sound of every word, and even every footstep 
in that house since the terrible news had come, 
so now the smile of the little princess influ- 
enced by the general mood though without 
knowing its cause was such as to remind one 
still more of the general sorrow. 

"Dearest, I'm afraid this morning's fruschti- 
que * as F6ka the cook calls it has disagreed 
with me." 

"What is the matter with you, my darling? 
You look pale. Oh, you are very pale!" said 
Princess Mary in alarm, running with her soft, 
ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law. 

"Your excellency, should not Mary Bogda- 
novna be sent for?" said one of the maids who 
was present. (Mary Bogddnovna was a mid- 

1 Fruhstiick: breakfast. 



BOOK FOUR 



181 



wife from the neighboring town, who had been 
at Bald Hills for the last fortnight.) 

"Oh yes," assented Princess Mary, "perhaps 
that's it. I'll go. Courage, my angel." She kissed 
Lise and was about to leave the room. 

"Oh, no, no!" And besides the pallor and 
the physical suffering on the little princess' 
face, an expression of childish fear of inevit- 
able pain showed itself. 

"No, it's only indigestion! . . . Say it's only 
indigestion, say so, Mary! Say . . ." And the lit- 
tle princess began to cry capriciously like a 
suffering child and to wring her little hands 
even with some affectation. Princess Mary ran 
out of the room to fetch Mary Bogda* novna. 

"Mon T&gt;ieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as 
she left the room. 

The midwife was already on her way to meet 
her, rubbing her small, plump white hands 
with an air of calm importance. 

"Mary Bogddnovna, I think it's beginning!" 
said Princess Mary looking at the midwifewith 
wide-open eyes of alarm. 

"Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess," said 
Mary Bogdnovna, not hastening her steps. 
"You young ladies should not know anything 
about it." 

"But how is it the doctor from Moscow is 
not here yet?" said the princess. (In accord- 
ance with Lise's and Prince Andrew's wishes 
they had sent in good time to Moscow for a 
doctor and were expecting him at any mo- 
ment.) 

"No matter, Princess, don't be alarmed,"said 
Mary Bogdnovna. "We'll manage very well 
without a doctor." 

Five minutes later Princess Mary from her 
room heard something heavy being carried by. 
She looked out. The menservants were carry- 
ing the large leather sofa from Prince An- 
drew's study into the bedroom. On their faces 
was a quiet and solemn look. 

Princess Mary sat alone in her room listen- 
ing to the sounds in the house, now and then 
opening her door when someone passed and 
watching what was going on in the passage. 
Some women passing with quiet steps in and 
out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and 
turned away. She did not venture to ask any 
questions, and shut the door again, now sitting 
down in her easy chair, now taking her prayer 
book, now kneeling before the icon stand. To 
her surprise and distress she found that her 
prayers did not calm her excitement. Suddenly 
her door opened softly and her old nurse, Pra- 
sk6vya Sdvishna, who hardly ever came to that 



room as the old prince had forbidden it, ap- 
peared on the threshold with a shawl round 
her head. 

"I've come to sit with you a bit, Mdsha," said 
the nurse, "and here I've brought the prince's 
wedding candles to light before his saint, my 
angel," she said with a sigh. 

"Oh, nurse, I'm so glad!" 

"God is merciful, birdie." 

The nurse lit the gilt candles before the 
icons and sat down by the door with her knit- 
ting. Princess Mary took a book and began 
reading. Only when footsteps or voices were 
heard did they look at one another, the prin- 
cess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encour- 
aging. Everyone in the house was dominated 
by the same feeling that Princess Mary experi- 
enced as she sat in her room. But owing to the 
superstition that the fewer the people who 
know of it the less a woman in travail suffers, 
everyone tried to pretend not to know; no 
one spoke of it, but apart from the ordinary 
staid and respectful good manners habitual in 
the prince's household, a common anxiety, a 
softening of the heart, and a consciousness 
that something great and mysterious was be- 
ing accomplished at that moment made itself 
felt. 

There was no laughter in the maids' large 
hall. In the menservants' hall all sat waiting, 
silently and alert. In the outlying serfs' quar- 
ters torches and candles were burning and no 
one slept. The old prince, stepping on his 
heels, paced up and down his study and sent 
Tikhon to ask Mary Bogddnovna what news. 
"Say only that 'the prince told me to ask,' and 
come and tell me her answer." 

"Inform the prince that labor has begun," 
said Mary Bogddnovna, giving the messenger a 
significant look. 

Tfkhon went and told the prince. 

"Very good!" said the prince closing the 
door behind him, and Tikhon did not hear 
the slightest sound from the study after that. 

After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff 
the candles, and, seeing the prince was lying 
on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his per- 
turbed face, shook his head, and going up to 
him silently kissed him on the shoulder and 
left the room without snuffing the candles or 
saying why he had entered. The most solemn 
mystery in the world continued its course. 
Evening passed, night came, and the feeling of 
suspense and softening of heart in the presence 
of the unfathomable did not lessen but in- 
creased. No one slept. 



i8* 



WAR AND PEACE 



It was one of those March nights when win- 
ter seems to wish to resume its sway and scat- 
ters its last snows and storms with desperate 
fury. A relay of horses had been sent up the 
highroad to meet the German doctor from 
Moscow who was expected every moment, and 
men on horseback with lanterns were sent to 
the crossroads to guide him over the country 
road with its hollows and snow-covered pools 
of water. 

Princess Mary had long since put aside her 
book: she sat silent, her luminous eyes fixed on 
her nurse's wrinkled face (every line of which 
she knew so well), on the lock of gray hair that 
escaped from under the kerchief, and the loose 
skin that hung under her chin. 

Nurse Sdvishna, knitting in hand, was tell- 
ing in low tones, scarcely hearing or under- 
standing her own words, what she had told 
hundreds of times before: how the late prin- 
cess had given birth to Princess Mary in Kish- 
enev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to 
help instead of a midwife. 

"God is merciful, doctors are never needed," 
she said. 

Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently a- 
gainst the casement of the window, from which 
the double frame had been removed (by order 
of the prince, one window frame was removed 
in each room as soon as the larks returned), 
and, forcing open a loosely closed latch, set the 
damask curtain flapping and blew out the can- 
dle with its chill, snowy draft. Princess Mary 
shuddered; her nurse, putting down the stock- 
ing she was knitting, went to the window and 
leaning out tried to catch the open casement. 
The cold wind flapped the ends of her ker- 
chief and her loose locks of gray hair. 

"Princess, my dear, there's someone driving 
up the avenue!" she said, holding the casement 
and not closing it. "With lanterns. Most likely 
the doctor." 

"Oh, my God! thank God!" said Princess 
Mary. "I must go and meet him, he does not 
know Russian." 

Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head 
and ran to meet the newcomer. As she was 
crossing the anteroom she saw through the 
window a carriage with lanterns, standing at 
the entrance. She went out on the stairs. On a 
bani&amp;ter post stood a tallow candle which gut- 
tered in the draft. On the landing below, 
Philip, the footman, stood looking scared and 
holding another candle. Still lower, beyond 
the turn of the staircase, one could hear the 
footstep of someone in thick felt boots, and a 



voice that seemed familiar to Princess Mary 
was saying something. 

"Thank God!" said the voice. "And Father?" 

"Gone to bed," replied the voice of Demydn 
the house steward, who was downstairs. 

Then the voice said something more, Dem- 
ydn replied, and the steps in the felt boots ap- 
proached the unseen bend of the staircase more 
rapidly. 

"It's Andrew!" thought Princess Mary. "No 
it can't be, that would be too extraordinary," 
and at the very moment she thought this, the 
face and figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur 
cloak the deep collar of which was covered with 
snow, appeared on the landing where the foot- 
man stood with the candle. Yes, it was he, pale, 
thin, with a changed and strangely softened 
but agitated expression on his face. He came 
up the stairs and embraced his sister. 

"You did not get my letter?" he asked, and 
not waiting for a reply which he would not 
have received, for the princess was unable to 
speak he turned back, rapidly mounted the 
stairs again with the doctor who had entered 
the hall after him (they had met at the last 
post station), and again embraced his sister. 

"What a strange fate, Msha darling!" And 
having taken off his cloak and felt boots, he 
went to the little princess' apartment. 

CHAPTER IX 

THE LITTLE PRINCESS lay supported by pillows, 
with a white cap on her head (the pains had 
just left her). Strands of her black hair lay 
round her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her 
charming rosy mouth with its downy lip was 
open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince An- 
drew entered and paused facing her at the foot 
of the sofa on which she was lying. Her glitter- 
ing eyes, filled with childlike fear and excite- 
ment, rested on him without changing their 
expression. "I love you all and have done no 
harm to anyone; why must I suffer so? Help 
me!" her look seemed to say. She saw her hus- 
band, but did not realize the significance of his 
appearance before her now. Prince Andrew 
went round the sofa and kissed her forehead. 

"My darling!" he said a word he had never 
used to her before. "God is merciful. . . ." 

She looked at him inquiringly and with child- 
like reproach. 

"I expected help from you and I get none, 
none from you either 1" said her eyes. She was 
not surprised at his having come; she did not 
realize that he had come. His coming had noth- 
ing to do with her sufferings or with their re- 



BOOK FOUR 



lief. The pangs began again and Mary Bogdd- 
novna advised Prince Andrew to leave the 
room. 

The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went 
out and, meeting Princess Mary, again joined 
her. They began talking in whispers, but their 
talk broke off at every moment. They waited 
and listened. 

"Go, dear," said Princess Mary. 

Prince Andrew went again to his wife and 
sat waiting in the room next to hers. A woman 
came from the bedroom with a frightened face 
and became confused when she saw Prince An- 
drew. He covered his face with his hands and 
remained so for some minutes. Piteous, help- 
less, animal moans came through the door. 
Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and 
tried to open it. Someone was holding it shut. 

"You can't come in! You can't!" said a terri- 
fied voice from within. 

He began pacing the room. The screaming 
ceased, and a few more seconds went by. Then 
suddenly a terrible shriek it could not be hers, 
she could not scream like that came from the 
bedroom. Prince Andrew ran to the door; the 
scream ceased and he heard the wail of an in- 
fant. 

"What have they taken a baby in there for?" 
thought Prince Andrew in the first second. "A 
baby? What baby . . . ? Why is there a baby 
there? Or is the baby born?" 

Then suddenly he realized the joyful signif- 
icance of that wail; tears choked him, and 
leaning his elbows on the window sill be began 
to cry, sobbing like a child. The door opened. 
The doctor with his shirt sleeves tucked up, 
without a coat, pale and with a trembling jaw, 
came out of the room. Prince Andrew turned 
to him, but the doctor gave him a bewildered 
look and passed by without a word. A woman 
rushed out and seeing Prince Andrew stopped, 
hesitating on the threshold. He went into his 
wife's room. She was lying dead, in the same 
position he had seen her in five minutes be- 
fore and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor 
of the cheeks, the same expression was on her 
charming childlike face with its upper lip cov- 
ered with tiny black hair. 

"I love you all, and have done no harm to 
anyone; and what have you done to me?" 
said her charming, pathetic, dead face. 

In a corner of the room something red and 
tiny gave a grunt and squealed in Mary Bog- 
ddnovna's trembling white hands. 

Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping 



softly, went into his father's room. The old 
man already knew everything. He was stand- 
ing close to the door and as soon as it opened 
his rough old arms closed like a vise round his 
son's neck, and without a word he began to sob 
like a child. 

Three days later the little princess was buried, 
and Prince Andrew went up the steps to where 
the coffin stood, to give her the farewell kiss. 
And there in the coffin was the same face, 
though with closed eyes. "Ah, what have you 
done to me?" it still seemed to say, and Prince 
Andrew felt that something gave way in his 
soul and that he was guilty of a sin he could 
neither remedy nor forget. He could not weep. 
The old man too came up and kissed the wax- 
en little hands that lay quietly crossed one on 
the other on her breast, and to him, too, her 
face seemed to say: "Ah, what have you done 
to me, and why?" And at the sight the old man 
turned angrily away. 

Another five days passed, and thentheyoung 
Prince Nicholas Andntevich was baptized. The 
wet nurse supported the coverlet with her chin, 
while the priest with a goose feather anointed 
the boy's little red and wrinkled soles and 
palms. 

His grandfather, who was his godfather, trem- 
bling and afraid of dropping him, carried the 
infant round the battered tin font and handed 
him over to the godmother, Princess Mary. 
Prince Andrew sat in another room, faint with 
fear lest the baby should be drowned in the 
font, and awaited the termination of the cere- 
mony. He looked up joyfully at the baby when 
the nurse brought it to him and nodded ap- 
proval when she told him that the wax with 
the baby's hair had not sunk in the font but 
had floated. 

CHAPTER X 

ROSTOV'S SHARE in D61okhov's duel with Be- 
ziikhov was hushed up by the efforts of the old 
count, and instead of being degraded to the 
ranks as he expected he was appointed an ad- 
jutant to the governor general of Moscow. As 
a result he could not go to the country with 
the rest of the family, but was kept all summer 
in Moscow by his new duties. D61okhov recov- 
ered, and Rost6v became very friendly with 
him during his convalescence. D61okhov lay ill 
at his mother's who loved him passionately and 
tenderly, and old Mary Ivnovna, who had 
grown fond of Rost6v for his friendship to her 



184 



WAR AND PEACE 



Fdya, often talked to him about her son. 

"Yes, Count," she would say, "he is too no- 
ble and pure-souled for our present, depraved 
world. No one now loves virtue; it seems like 
a reproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count, 
was it right, was it honorable, of Beziikhov? 
And Fdya, with his noble spirit, loved him 
and even now never says a word against him. 
Those pranks in Petersburg when they played 
some tricks on a policeman, didn't they do it 
together? And therel Beziikhov got off scot- 
free, while F6dya had to bear the whole bur- 
Jen on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to go 
through! It's true he has been reinstated, but 
how could they fail to do that? I think there 
were not many such gallant sons of the father- 
land out there as he. And now this duel! 
Have these people no feeling, or honor? Know- 
ing him to be an only son, to challenge him 
and shoot so straight! It's well God had mercy 
on us. And what was it for? Who doesn't have 
intrigues nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, 
as I see things he should have shown it sooner, 
but he lets it go on for months. And then to 
call him out, reckoning on Fdya not fighting 
because he owed him money! What baseness! 
What meanness! I know you understand Fe"d- 
ya, my dear count; that, believe me, is why I 
am so fond of you. Few people do understand 
him. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!" 

D61okhov himself during his convalescence 
spoke to Rost6v in a way no one would have 
expected of him. 

"I know people consider me a bad man!" he 
said. "Let them! I don't care a straw about any- 
one but those I love; but those I love, I love so 
that I would give my life for them, and the oth- 
ers I'd throttle if they stood in my way. I have 
an adored, a priceless mother, and two or three 
friends you among them and as for the rest 
I only care about them in so far as they are 
harmful or useful. And most of them are harm- 
ful, especially the women. Yes, dear boy," he 
continued, "I have met loving, noble, high- 
minded men, but I have not yet met any wom- 
encountesses or cooks who were not venal. I 
have not yet met that divine purity and devo- 
tion I look for in women. If I found such a one 
I'd give my life for her! But those! . . ." and he 
made a gesture of contempt. "And believe me, 
if I still value my life it is only because I still 
hope to meet such a divine creature, who will 
regenerate, purify, and elevate me. But you 
don't understand it." 

"Oh, yes, I quite understand," answered Ros- 
tov, who was under his new friend's influence. 



In the autumn the Rost6vs returned to Mos- 
cow. Early in the winter Denfsov also came 
back and stayed with them. The first half of 
the winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rost6v 
spent in Moscow, was one of the happiest, mer- 
riest times for him and the whole family. Nich- 
olas brought many young men to his parents' 
house. Ve'ra was a handsome girl of twenty; 
Sdnya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an 
opening flower; Natdsha, half grown up and 
half child, was now childishly amusing, now 
girlishly enchanting. 

At that time in the Rost6vs' house there pre- 
vailed an amorous atmosphere characteristic 
of homes where there are very young and very 
charming girls. Every young man who came to 
the house seeing those impressionable, smil- 
ing young faces (smiling probably at their own 
happiness), feeling the eager bustle around 
him, and hearing the fitful bursts of song and 
music and the inconsequent but friendly prat- 
tle* of young girls ready for anything and full 
of hope experienced the same feeling; shar- 
ing with the young folk of the Rost6vs' house- 
hold a readiness to fall in love and an expecta- 
tion of happiness. 

Among the young men introduced byRost6v 
one of the first was D61okhov, whom everyone 
in the house liked except Natdsha. She almost 
quarreled with her brother about him. She in- 
sisted that he was a bad man, and that in the 
duel with Beziikhov, Pierre was right and D6- 
lokhov wrong, and further that he was disa- 
greeable and unnatural. 

"There's nothing for me to understand," she 
cried out with resolute self-will, "he is wicked 
and heartless. There now, I like your Denisov 
though he is a rake and all that, still I like him; 
so you see I do understand. I don't know how 
to put it ... with this one everything is calcu- 
lated, and I don't like that. But Denfsov . . ." 

"Oh, Denfsov is quite different," replied 
Nicholas, implying that even Denfsov was noth- 
ing compared to D61okhov "you must under- 
stand what a soul there is in D61okhov, you 
should see him with his mother. Whata heart!" 

"Well, I don't know about that, but I am 
uncomfortable with him. And do you know he 
has fallen in love with S6nya?" 

"What nonsense. . . ." 

"I'm certain of it; you'll see." 

Natasha's prediction proved true. D61okhov, 
who did not usually care for the society of la- 
dies, began to come often to the house, and the 
question for whose sake he came (though no 
one spoke of it) was soon settled. He came be- 



cause of S6nya. And S6nya, though she would 
never have dared to say so, knew it and blushed 
scarlet every time D61okhov appeared. 

D61okhov often dined at the Rost6vs', never 
missed a performance at which they were pres- 
ent, and went to logel's balls for young people 
which the Rostovs always attended. He was 
pointedly attentive to S6nya and looked at her 
in such a way that not only could she not bear 
his glances without coloring, but even the old 
countess and Natasha blushed when they saw 
his looks. 

It was evident that this strange, strong man 
was under the irresistible influence of the dark, 
graceful girl who loved another. 

Rost6v noticed something new in D61okhov's 
relations with S6nya, but he did not explain to 
himself what these new relations were. "They're 
always in love with someone," he thought 
of S6nya and Natdsha. But he was not as much 
at ease with S6nya and D61okhov as before and 
was less frequently at home. 

In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again 
begun talking of the war with Napoleon with 
even greater warmth than the year before. Or- 
ders were given to raise recruits, ten men in 
every thousand for the regular army, and be- 
sides this, nine men in every thousand for the 
militia. Everywhere Bonaparte was anathema- 
tized and in Moscow nothing but the coming 
war was talked of. For the Rostov family the 
whole interest of these preparations for war 
lay in the fact that Nicholas would not hear of 
remaining in Moscow, and only awaited the 
termination of Denfsov's furlough afterChrist- 
mas to return with him to their regiment. His 
approaching departure did not prevent his 
amusing himself, but rather gave zest to his 
pleasures. He spent the greater part of his time 
away from home, at dinners, parties, and balls. 

CHAPTER XI 

ON THE THIRD DAY after Christmas Nicholas 
dined at home, a thing he had rarely done of 
late. It was a grand farewell dinner, as he and 
Denfsov were leaving to join their regiment 
after Epiphany. About twenty people were 
present, including D61okhov and Denfsov. 

Never had love been so much in the air, and 
never had the amorous atmosphere made itself 
so strongly felt in the Rost6vs' house as at this 
holiday time. "Seize the moments of happi- 
ness, love and be lovedl That is the only reality 
in the world, all else is folly. It is the one thing 
we are interested in here," said the spirit of 
the place. 



BOOK FOUR 185 

Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two 



pairs of horses, without visiting all the places 
he meant to go to and where he had been in- 
vited, returned home just before dinner. As 
soon as he entered he noticed and felt the ten- 
sion of the amorous air in the house, and also 
noticed a curious embarrassment among some 
of those present. S6nya, D61okhov, and the old 
countess were especially disturbed, and to a 
lesser degree Natdsha. Nicholas understood that 
something must have happened between S6n- 
ya and Dolokhov before dinner, and with the 
kindly sensitiveness natural to him was very 
gentle and wary with them both at dinner. On 
that same evening there was to be one of the 
balls that logel (the dancing master) gave for 
his pupils durings the holidays. 

"Nicholas, will you come to logel's? Please 
dol" said Natdsha. "He asked you, and Vasfli 
Dmftrich * is also going." 

"Where would I not go at the countess' com- 
mand!" said Denfsov, who at the Rostovs' had 
jocularly assumed the role of Natdsha's knight. 
"I'm even weady to dance the pas de chdle." 

"If I have time," answered Nicholas. "But I 
promised the Arkhdrovs; they have a party." 

"And you?" he asked D61okhov, but as soon 
as he had asked the question he noticed that it 
should not have been put. 

"Perhaps," coldly and angrily replied D6- 
lokhov, glancing at S6nya, and, scowling, he 
gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given 
Pierre at the Club dinner. 

"There is something up," thought Nicholas, 
and he was further confirmed in this conclu- 
sion by the fact that D61okhov left immediate- 
ly after dinner. He called Natdsha and asked 
her what was the matter. 

"And I was looking for you," said Natdsha 
running out to him. "I told you, but you would 
not believe it," she said triumphantly. "He has 
proposed to S6nya!" 

Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with 
S6nya of late, something seemed to give way 
within him at this news. D61okhov was a suit- 
able and in some respects a brilliant match for 
the dowerless, orphan girl. From the point of 
view of the old countess and of society it was 
out of the question for her to refuse him. And 
therefore Nicholas' first feeling on hearing the 
news was one of anger with Sonya. . . . He tried 
to say, "That's capital; of course she'll forget 
her childish promises and accept the offer," 
but before he had time to say it Natdsha began 
again. 

1 Denfsov. 



i86 



WAR AND PEACE 



"And fancy! she refused him quite definite- 
ly!" adding, after a pause, "she told him she 
loved another." 

"Yes, my S6nya could not have done other- 
wise!" thought Nicholas. 

"Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, 
and I know she won't change once she has 
said . . ." 

"And Mamma pressed her!" said Nicholas 
reproachfully. 

"Yes," said Natdsha. "Do you know, Nich- 
olasdon't be angrybut I know you will not 
marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but I 
know for certain that you won't marry her." 

"Now you don't know that at all! "said Nich- 
olas. "But I must talk to her. What a darling 
S6nya is!" he added with a smile. 

"Ah, she is indeed a darling! I'll send her to 
you." 

And Natasha kissed her brother and ran 
away. 

A minute later S6nya came in with a fright- 
ened, guilty, and scared look. Nicholas went 
up to her and kissed her hand. This was the 
first time since his return that they had talked 
alone and about their love. 

"Sophie," he began, timidly at first and then 
more and more boldly, "if you wish to refuse 
one who is not only a brilliant and advanta- 
geous match but a splendid, noble fellow . . . 
he is my friend ..." 

S6nya interrupted him. 

"I have already refused," she said hurriedly. 

"If you are refusing for my sake, I am afraid 
that I ..." 

S6nya again interrupted. She gave him an 
imploring, frightened look. 

"Nicholas, don't tell me that!" she said. 

"No, but I must. It may be arrogant of me, 
but still it is best to say it. If you refuse him on 
my account, I must tell you the whole truth. 
I love you, and I think I love you more than 
anyone else. . . ." 

"That is enough for me," said S6nya, blush- 
ing. 

"No, but I have been in love a thousand 
times and shall fall in love again, though for 
no one have I such a feeling of friendship, 
confidence, and love as I have for you. Then I 
am young. Mamma does not wish it. In a word, 
I make no promise. And I beg you to consider 
Dolokhov's offer," he said, articulating his 
friend's name with difficulty. 

"Don't say that to me! I want nothing. I love 
you as a brother and always shall, and I want 
nothing more." 



"You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, 
but I am afraid of misleading you." 
And Nicholas again kissed her hand. 

CHAPTER XII 

IOGEL'S WERE the most enjoyable balls in Mos- 
cow. So said the mothers as they watched their 
young people executing their newly learned 
steps, and so said the youths and maidens them- 
selves as they danced till they were ready to 
drop, and so said the grown-up young men and 
women who came to these balls with an air of 
condescension and found them most enjoyable. 
That year two marriages had come of these 
balls. The two pretty young Princesses Gor- 
chak6v met suitors there and were married and 
so further increased the fame of these dances. 
What distinguished them from others was the 
absence of host or hostess and the presence of 
the good-natured logel, flying about like a 
feather and bowing according to the rules of 
his art, as he collected the tickets from all his 
visitors. There was the fact that only those 
came who wished to dance and amuse them- 
selves as girls of thirteen and fourteen do who 
are wearing long dresses for the first time. With 
scarcely any exceptions they all were, or seemed 
to be, pretty so rapturous were their smiles 
and so sparkling their eyes. Sometimes the best 
of the pupils, of whom Natasha, who was ex- 
ceptionally graceful, was first, even danced the 
pas de chdle, but at this last ball only the Jcos&gt; 
saise, the anglaise, and the mazurka, which was 
just coming into fashion, were danced, logel 
had taken a ballroom in Bezukhov's house, and 
the ball, as everyone said, was a great success. 
There were many pretty girls and the Rost6v 
girls were among the prettiest. They were both 
particularly happy and gay. That evening, 
proud of D61okhov's proposal, her refusal, and 
her explanation with Nicholas, S6nya twirled 
about before she left home so that the maid 
could hardly get her hair plaited, and she was 
transparently radiant with impulsive joy. 

Natdsha no less proud of her first long dress 
and of being at a real ball was even happier. 
They were both dressed in white muslin with 
pink ribbons. 

Natdsha fell in love the very moment she en- 
tered the ballroom. She was not in love with 
anyone in particular, but with everyone. What- 
ever person she happened to look at she was in 
love with for that moment. 

"Oh, how delightful it is!" she kept saying, 
running up to S6nya. 

Nicholas and Denisov were walking up and 



BOOK FOUR 



187 



down, looking with kindly patronage at the 
dancers. 

"How sweet she is she will be a weal beau- 
ty 1" saidDenisov. 

"Who?" 

"Countess Natasha," answered Denisov. 

"And how she dances! What gwace!" he said 
again after a pause. 

"Who are you talking about?" 

"About your sister," ejaculated Denisov tes- 
tily. 

Rost6v smiled. 

"My dear count, you were one of my best pu- 
pils you must dance," said little logel coming 
up to Nicholas. "Look how many charming 
young ladies" He turned with the same re- 
quest to Denisov who was also a former pupil 
of his. 

"No, my dear fellow, I'll be a wallflower," 
said Denisov. "Don't you wecollect what bad 
use I made of your lessons?" 

"Oh no!" said logel, hastening to reassure 
him. "You were only inattentive, but you had 
talentoh yes, you had talent!" 

The band struck up the newly introduced 
mazurka. Nicholas could not refuse logel and 
asked S6nya to dance. Denfsov sat down by the 
old ladies and, leaning on his saber and beat- 
ing time with his foot, told them something 
funny and kept them amused, while he watched 
the young people dancing, logel with Natdsha, 
his pride and his best pupil, were the first cou- 
ple. Noiselessly, skillfully stepping with his lit- 
tle feet in low shoes, logel flew first across the 
hall with Natasha, who, though shy, went on 
carefully executing her steps. Denfsov did not 
take his eyes off her and beat time with his 
saber in a way that clearly indicated that if he 
was not dancing it was because he would not 
and not because he could not. In the middle 
of a figure he beckoned to Rost6v who was 
passing: 

"This is not at all the thing," he said. "What 
sort of Polish mazuwka is this? But she does 
dance splendidly." 

Knowing that Denisov had a reputation 
even in Poland for the masterly way in which 
he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up to 
Natasha: 

"Go and choose Denfsov. He is a real dancer, 
a wonder!" he said. 

When it came to Natdsha's turn to choose a 
partner, she rose and, tripping rapidly across 
in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran tim- 
idly to the corner where Denfsov sat. She saw 
that everybody was looking at her and waiting. 



Nicholas saw that Denfsov was refusing though 
he smiled delightedly. He ran up to them. 

"Please, Vasfli Dmftrich," Natdsha was say- 
ing, "do come!" 

"Oh no, let me off, Countess," Denfsov re- 
plied. 

"Now then, Vdska," said Nicholas. 

"They coax me as if I were Vdska the cat!" 
said Denfsov jokingly. 

"I'll sing for you a whole evening," said Na- 
tdsha. 

"Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with 
me!" said Denfsov, and he unhooked his saber. 
He came out from behind the chairs, clasped 
his partner's hand firmly, threw back his head, 
and advanced his foot, waiting for the beat. 
Only on horse back and in the mazurka was 
Denfsov's short stature not noticeable and he 
looked the fine fellow he felt himself to be. At 
the right beat of the music he looked sideways 
at his partner with a merry and triumphant 
air, suddenly stamped with one foot, bounded 
from the floor like a ball, and flew round the 
room taking his partner with him. He glided 
silently on one foot half across the room, and 
seeming not to notice the chairs was dashing 
straight at them, when suddenly, clinking his 
spurs and spreading out his legs, he stopped 
short on his heels, stood so a second, stamped 
on the spot clanking his spurs, whirled rapidly 
round, and, striking his left heel against his 
right, flew round again in a circle. Natdsha 
guessed what he meant to do, and abandoning 
herself to him followed his lead hardly know- 
ing how. First he spun her round, holding her 
now with his left, now with his right hand, then 
falling on one knee he twirled her round him, 
and again jumping up, dashed so impetuously 
forward that it seemed as if he would rush 
through the whole suite of rooms without draw- 
ing breath, and then he suddenly stopped and 
performed some new and unexpected steps. 
When at last, smartly whirling his partner 
round in front of her chair, he drew up with a 
click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natasha 
did not even make him a curtsy. She fixed her 
eyes on him in amazement, smiling as if she 
did not recognize him. 

"What does this mean?" she brought out. 

Although logel did not acknowledge this to 
be the real mazurka, everyone was delighted 
with Denfsov's skill, he was asked again and 
again as a partner, and the old men began smil- 
ingly to talk about Poland and the good old 
days. Denfsov, flushed after the mazurka and 
mopping himself with his handkerchief, sat 



i88 



WAR AND PEACE 



down by Natdsha and did not leave her for the 
rest of the evening. 

CHAPTER XIII 

FOR TWO DAYS after that Rost6v did not see 
D61okhov at his own or at D61okhov's home: 
on the third day he received a note from him: 

As I do not intend to be at your house again for 
reasons you know of, and am going to rejoin my 
regiment, I am giving a farewell supper tonight to 
my friendscome to the English Hotel. 

About ten o'clock Rost6v went to the English 
Hotel straight from the theater, where he had 
been with his family and Denisov. He was at 
once shown to the best room, which D61okhov 
had taken for that evening. Some twenty men 
were gathered round a table at which D61ok- 
hov sat between two candles. On the table was 
a pile of gold and paper money, and he was 
keeping the bank. Rost6v had not seen him 
since his proposal and S6nya's refusal and felt 
uncomfortable at the thought of how they 
would meet. 

D61okhov's clear, cold glance met Rost6v as 
soon as he entered the door, as though he had 
long expected him. 

"It's a long time since we met," he said. 
"Thanks for coming. I'll just finish dealing, 
and then Ilyiishka will come with his chorus." 

"I called once or twice at your house," said 
Rost6v, reddening. 

D61okhov made no reply. 

"You may punt," he said. 

Rost6v recalled at that moment a strange 
conversation he had once had with D61okhov. 
"None but fools trust to luck in play," D61ok- 
hov had then said. 

"Or are you afraid to play with me?" D61ok- 
hov now asked as if guessing Rost6v's thought. 

Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the 
mood he had shown at the Club dinner and at 
other times, when as if tired of everyday life he 
had felt a need to escape from it by some 
strange, and usually cruel, action. 

Rost6v felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, 
to find some joke with which to reply to D61ok- 
hov's words. But before he had thought of any- 
thing, D61okhov, looking straight in his face, 
said slowly and deliberately so that everyone 
could hear: 

"Do you remember we had a talk about cards 
. . . 'He's a fool who trusts to luck, one should 
make certain/ and I want to try." 

"To try his luck or the certainty?" Rostov 
asked himself. 



"Well, you'd better not play," D61okhov 
added, and springing a new pack of cards said: 
"Bank, gentlemen!" 

Moving the money forward he prepared to 
deal. Rost6v sat down by hi side and at first 
did not play. D61okhov kept glancing at him. 

"Why don't you play?" he asked. 

And strange to say Nicholas felt that he 
could not help taking up a card, putting a 
small stake on it, and beginning to play. 

"I have no money with me," he said. 

"I'll trust you." 

Rost6v staked five rubles on a card and lost, 
staked again, and again lost. D61okhov "killed," 
that is, beat, ten cards of Rost6v's running. 

"Gentlemen," said Dolokhov after he had 
dealt for some time. "Please place your money 
on the cards or I may get muddled in the reck- 
oning." 

One of the players said he hoped he might 
be trusted. 

"Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting 
the accounts mixed. So I ask you to put the 
money on your cards," replied D61okhov. 
"Don't stint yourself, we'll settle afterwards," 
he added, turning to Rost6v. 

The game continued; a waiter kept handing 
round champagne. 

All Rost6v's cards were beaten and he had 
eight hundred rubles scored up against him. 
He wrote "800 rubles" on a card, but while 
the waiter filled his glass he changed his mind 
and altered it to his usual stake of twenty 
rubles. 

"Leave it," said Dolokhov, though he did 
not seem to be even looking at Rostov, "you'll 
win it back all the sooner. I lose to the others 
but win from you. Or are you afraid of me?" 
he asked again. 

Rost6v submitted. He let the eight hundred 
remain and laid down a seven of hearts with a 
torn corner, which he had picked up from the 
floor. He well remembered that seven after- 
wards. He laid down the seven of hearts, on 
which with a broken bit of chalk he had writ- 
ten "800 rubles" in clear upright figures; he 
emptied the glass of warm champagne that was 
handed him, smiled at D61okhov's words, and 
with a sinking heart, waiting for a seven to 
turn up, gazed at D61okhov's hands which held 
the pack. Much depended on Rost6v's win- 
ning or losing on that seven of hearts. On the 
previous Sunday the old count had given his 
son two thousand rubles, and though he al- 
ways disliked speaking of money difficulties 
had told Nicholas that this was all he could let 



BOOK 

him have till May, and asked him to be more 
economical this time. Nicholas had replied 
that it would be more than enough for him 
and that he gave his word of honor not to take 
anything more till the spring. Now only twelve 
hundred rubles was left of that money, so that 
this seven of hearts meant for him not only the 
loss of sixteen hundred rubles, but the neces- 
sity of going back on his word. With a sinking 
heart he watched D61okhov's hands and 
thought, "Now then, make haste and let me 
have this card and I'll take my cap and drive 
home to supper with Denfsov, Natdsha, and 
S6nya, and will certainly never touch a card 
again." At that moment his home life, jokes 
with Ptya, talks with S6nya, duets with Natd- 
sha, piquet with his father, and even his com- 
fortable bed in the house on the Povarskaya 
rose before him with such vividness, clearness, 
and charm that it seemed as if it were all a lost 
and unappreciated bliss, long past. He could 
not conceive that a stupid chance, letting the 
seven be dealt to the right rather than to the 
left, might deprive him of all this happiness, 
newly appreciated and newly illumined, and 
plunge him into the depths of unknown and 
undefined misery. That could not be, yet he* 
awaited with a sinking heart the movement of 
D61okhov's hands. Those broad, reddish hands, 
with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt 
cuffs, laid down the pack and took up a glass 
and a pipe that were handed him. 

"So you are not afraid to play with me?" re- 
peated D61okhov, and as if about to tell a good 
story he put down the cards, leaned back in his 
chair, and began deliberately with a smile: 

"Yes, gentlemen, I've been told there's a ru- 
mor going about Moscow that I'm a sharper, 
so I advise you to be careful." 

"Come now, deal I" exclaimed Rost6v. 

"Oh, those Moscow gossips!" said D61okhov, 
and he took up the cards with a smile. 

"Aah!" Rost6v almost screamed lifting both 
hands to his head. The seven he needed was ly- 
ing uppermost, the first card in the pack. He 
had lost more than he could pay. 

"Still, don't ruin yourself 1" said D61okhov 
with a side glance at Rost6v as he continued to 
deal. 

CHAPTER XIV 

AN HOUR and a half later most of the players 
were but little interested in their own play. 

The whole interestwas concentrated on Ros- 
t6v. Instead of sixteen hundred rubles he had 
a long column of figures scored against him, 



FOUR 189 

which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, 
but that now, as he vaguely supposed, must 
have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality it al- 
ready exceeded twenty thousand rubles. D6- 
lokhov was no longer listening to stories or 
telling them, but followed every movement of 
Rostov's hands and occasionally ran his eyes 
over the score against him. He had decided to 
play until that score reached forty-three thou- 
sand. He had fixed on that number because 
forty-three was the sum of his and S6nya's joint 
ages. Rost6v, leaning his head on both hands, 
sat at the table which was scrawled over with 
figures, wet with spilled wine, and littered with 
cards. One tormenting impression did not leave 
him: that those broad- boned reddish hands 
with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt 
sleeves, those hands which he loved and hated, 
held him in their power. 

"Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine 
. . . winning it back's impossible . . . Oh, how 
pleasant it was at home I . . . The knave, double 
or quits ... it can't bel . . . And why is he doing 
this to me?" Rostov pondered. Sometimes he 
staked a large sum, but Drilokhov refused to 
accept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas 
submitted to him, and at one moment prayed 
to God as he had done on the battlefield at the 
bridge over the Enns, and then guessed that 
the card that came first to hand from the crum- 
pled heap under the table would save him, 
now counted the cords on his coat and took a 
card with that number and tried staking the 
total of his losses on it, then he looked round 
for aid from the other players, or peered at the 
now cold face of D61okhov and tried to read 
what was passing in his mind. 

"He knows of course what this loss means to 
me. He can't want my ruin. Wasn't he my 
friend? Wasn't I fond of him? But it's not his 
fault. What's he to do if he has such luck? . . . 
And it's not my fault either," he thought to 
himself, "I have done nothing wrong. Have I 
killed anyone, or insulted or wished harm to 
anyone? Why such a terrible misfortune? And 
when did it begin? Such a little while ago 1 
came to this table with the thought of winning 
a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mam- 
ma's name day and then going home. I was so 
happy, so free, so lightheartedl And I did not 
realize how happy I was! When did that end 
and when did this new, terrible state of things 
begin? What marked the change? I sat all the 
time in this same place at this table, chose and 
placed cards, and watched those broad-boned 
agile hands in the same way. When did it hap- 



igo 



WAR AND PEACE 



pen and what has happened? I am well and 
strong and still the same and in the same place. 
No, it can't be! Surely it will all end in noth- 
ing!" 

He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, 
though the room was not hot. His face was ter- 
rible and piteous to see, especially from its 
helpless efforts to seem calm. 

The score against him reached the fateful 
sum of forty-three thousand. Rost6v had just 
prepared a card, by bending the corner of 
which he meant to double the three thousand 
just put down to his score, when D61okhov, 
slamming down the pack of cards, put it aside 
and began rapidly adding up the total of Ros- 
t6v's debt, breaking the chalk as he marked the 
figures in his clear, bold hand. 

"Supper, it's time for supper! And here are 
the gypsies!" 

Some swarthy men and women were really 
entering from the cold outside and saying some- 
thing in their gypsy accents. Nicholas under- 
stood that it was all over; but he said in an in- 
different tone: 

"Well, won't you go on? I had a splendid 
card all ready," as if it were the fun of the 
game which interested him most. 

"It's all up! I'm lost!" thought he. "Now a 
bullet through my brainthat's all that's left 
me!" And at the same time he said in a cheer- 
ful voice: 

"Come now, just this one more little card!" 

"All right!" said D61okhov, having finished 
the addition. "All right! Twenty-one rubles," 
he said, pointing to the figure twenty-one by 
which the total exceeded the round sum of 
forty-three thousand; and taking up a pack he 
prepared to deal. Rost6v submissively unbent 
the corner of his card and, instead of the six 
thousand he had intended, carefully wrote 
twenty-one. 

"It's all the same to me," he said. "I only 
want to see whether you will let me win this 
ten, or beat it." 

D61okhov began to deal seriously. Oh, how 
Rost6v detested at that moment those hands 
with their short reddish fingers and hairy 
wrists, which held him in their power. . . . The 
ten fell to him. 

"You owe forty-three thousand, Count," said 
D61okhov, and stretching himself he rose from 
the table. "One does get tired sitting so long," 
he added. 

"Yes, I'm tired too," said Rost6v. 

D61okhov cut him short, as if to remind him 
that it was not for him to jest. 



"When am I to receive the money, Count?" 

Rost6v, flushing, drew D61okhov into the 
next room. 

"I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you 
take an I.O.U.?" he said. 

"I say, Rost6v," said D61okhov clearly, smil- 
ing and looking Nicholas straight in the eyes, 
"you know the saying, 'Lucky in love, unlucky 
at cards.' Your cousin is in love with you, I 
know." 

"Oh, it's terrible to feel oneself so in this 
man's power," thought Rost6v. He knew what 
a shock he would inflict on his father and 
mother by the news of this loss, he knew what 
a relief it would be to escape it all, and felt 
that Dolokhov knew that he could save him 
from all this shame and sorrow, but wanted 
now to play with him as a cat does with a 
mouse. 

"Your cousin . . ." D61okhov started to say, 
but Nicholas interrupted him. 

"My cousin has nothing to do with this and 
it's not necessary to mention her!" he ex- 
claimed fiercely. 

"Then when am I to have it?" 

"Tomorrow," replied Rost6v and left the 
'room. 

CHAPTER XV 

To SAY "tomorrow" and keep up a dignified 
tone was not difficult, but to go home alone, 
see his sisters, brother, mother, and father, con- 
fess and ask for money he had no right to after 
giving his word of honor, was terrible. 

At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The 
young people, after returning from the theater, 
had had supper and were grouped round the 
clavichord. As soon as Nicholas entered, he 
was enfolded in that poetic atmosphere of love 
which pervaded the Rost6v household that 
winter and, now after D61okhov's proposal and 
logel's ball, seemed to have grown thicker 
round S6nya and Natdsha as the air does be- 
fore a thunderstorm. S6nya and Natasha, in 
the light-blue dresses they had worn at the 
theater, looking pretty and conscious of it, 
were standing by the clavichord, happy and 
smiling. Vera was playing chess with Shinshin 
in the drawing room. The old countess, wait- 
ing for the return of her husband and son, sat 
playing patience with the old gentlewoman 
who lived in their house. Denfsov, with spar- 
kling eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord 
striking chords with his short fingers, his legs 
thrown back and his eyes rolling as he sang, 
with his small, husky, but true voice, some 



BOOK FOUR 



verses called "Enchantress," which he had com- 
posed, and to which he was trying to fit music: 

Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre 
What magic power is this recalls me still? 
What spark has set my inmost soul on fire, 
What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill? 

He was singing in passionate tones, gazing with 
his sparkling black-agate eyes at the frightened 
and happy Natdsha. 

"Splendid! Excellent!" exclaimed Natdsha. 
"Another verse," she said, without noticing 
Nicholas. 

"Everything's still the same with them," 
thought Nicholas, glancing into the drawing 
room, where he saw Vra and his mother with 
the old lady. 

"Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natdsha, 
running up to him. 

"Is Papa at home?" he asked. 

"I am so glad you've come!" said Natdsha, 
without answering him. "We are en joying our- 
selves! Vasfli Dmftrich is staying a day longer 
for my sake! Did you know?" 

"No, Papa is not back yet," said S6nya. 

"Nicholas, have you come? Come here, 
dear!" called the old countess from the draw- 
ing room. 

Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and 
sitting down silently at her table began to 
watch her hands arranging the cards. From the 
dancing room, they still heard the laughter 
and merry voices trying to persuade Natdsha to 
sing. 

"All wight! All wight!" shouted Denfsov. 
"It's no good making excuses now! It's your 
turn to sing the ba'cawolla I entweat you!" 

The countess glanced at her silent son. 

"What is the matter?" she asked. 

"Oh, nothing," said he, as if weary of being 
continually asked the same question. "Will 
Papa be back soon?" 

"I expect so." 

"Everything's the same with them. They 
know nothing about it! Where am I to go?" 
thought Nicholas, and went again into the 
dancing room where the clavichord stood. 

S6nya was sitting at the clavichord, playing 
the prelude to Denfsov's favorite barcarolle. 
Natdsha was preparing to sing. Denfsov was 
looking at her with enraptured eyes. 

Nicholas began pacing up and down the 
room. 

"Why do they want to make her sing? How 
can she sing? There's nothing to be happy 
about I " thought he. 



S6nya struck the first chord of the prelude. 

"My God, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! 
A bullet through my brain is the only thing 
left me not singing!" his thoughts ran on. "Go 
away? But where to? It's all one let them sing!" 

He continued to pace the room, looking 
gloomily at Denfsov and the girls and avoiding 
their eyes. 

"Nik61enka, what is the matter?" S6nya's 
eyes fixed on him seemed to ask. She noticed at 
once that something had happened to him. 

Nicholas turned away from her. Natdsha too, 
with her quick instinct, had instantly noticed 
her brother's condition. But, though she no- 
ticed it, she was herself in such high spirits at 
that moment, so far from sorrow, sadness, or 
self-reproach, that she purposely deceived her- 
self as young people of ten do." No, I am too hap- 
py now to spoil my enjoyment by sympathy with 
anyone's sorrow," she felt, and she said to her- 
self: "No, I must be mistaken, he must be feel- 
ing happy, just as I am." 

"Now, Sonya!" she said, going to the very 
middle of the room, where she considered the 
resonance was best. 

Having lifted her head and let her arms 
droop lifelessly, as ballet dancers do, Natdsha, 
rising energetically from her heels to her toes, 
stepped to the middle of the room and stood 
still. 

"Yes, that's me!"sheseemed to say, answering 
the rapt gaze with which Denfsov followed her. 

"And what is she so pleased about?" thought 
Nicholas, looking at his sister. "Why isn't she 
dull and ashamed?" 

Natdsha took the first note, her throat 
swelled, her chest rose, her eyes became serious. 
At that moment she was oblivious of her sur- 
roundings, and from her smiling lips flowed 
sounds which anyone may produce at the same 
intervals and hold for the same time, but which 
leave you cold a thousand times and the thou- 
sand and first time thrill you and make you 
weep. 

Natdsha, that winter, had for the first time 
begun to sing seriously, mainly because Den- 
fsov so delighted in her singing. She no longer 
sang as a child, there was no longer in her sing- 
ing that comical, childish, painstaking effect 
that had been in it before; but she did not yet 
sing well, as all the connoisseurs who heard her 
said: "It is not trained, but it is a beautiful 
voice that must be trained." Only they gener- 
ally said this some time after she had finished 
singing. While that untrained voice, with its 
incorrect breathing and labored transitions, 



WAR AND PEACE 



was sounding, even the connoisseurs said noth- 
ing, but only delighted in it and wished to hear 
it again. In her voice there was a virginal 
freshness, an unconsciousness of her own pow- 
ers, and an as yet untrained velvety softness, 
which so mingled with her lack of art in sing- 
ing that it seemed as if nothing in that voice 
could be altered without spoiling it. 

"What is this?" thought Nicholas, listening 
to her with widely opened eyes. "What has 
happened to her? How she is singing today 1" 
And suddenly the whole world centered for 
him on anticipation of the next note, the next 
phrase, and everything in the world was di- 
vided into three beats: "Oh mio crudelc affet- 
to" . . . One, two, three . . . one, two, three . . . 
One . . . "Oh mio crudele affetto." . . . One, 
two, three . . . One. "Oh, this senseless life of 
ours!" thought Nicholas. "All this misery, and 
money, and D61okhov, and anger, and honor 
it's all nonsense . . . but this is real. . . . Now 
then, Natdsha, now then, dearest! Now then, 
darling! How will she take that si? She's taken 
it! Thank God!" And without noticing that he 
was singing, to strengthen the si he sung a 
second, a third below the high note. "Ah, God! 
How fine! Did I really take it? How fortunate!" 
he thought. 

Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved 
was something that was finest in Rostov's soul! 
And this something was apart from everything 
else in the world and above everything in the 
world. "What were losses, and D61okhov, and 
words of honor? . . . All nonsense! One might 
kill and rob and yet be happy " 

CHAPTER XVI 

IT WAS LONG since Rost6v had felt such enjoy- 
ment from music as he did that day. But no 
sooner had Natdsha finished her barcarolle 
than reality again presented itself. He got up 
without saying a word and went downstairs to 
his own room. A quarter of an hour later the 
old count came in from his Club, cheerful and 
contented. Nicholas, hearing him drive up, 
went to meet him. 

"Well had a good time?" said the old count, 
smiling gaily and proudly at his son. 

Nicholas tried to say "Yes," but could not: 
and he nearly burst into sobs. The count was 
lighting his pipe and did not notice his son's 
condition. 

"Ah, it can't be avoided!" thought Nicholas, 
for the first and last time. And suddenly, in the 
most casual tone, which made him feel ashamed 
of himself, he said, as if merely asking his fa- 



ther to let him have the carriage to drive to 
town: 

"Papa, I have come on a matter of business. 
I was nearly forgetting. I need some money." 

"Dear me!" said his father, who was in a spe- 
cially good humor. "I told you it would not be 
enough. How much?" 

"Very much," said Nicholas flushing, and 
with a stupid careless smile, for which he was 
long unable to forgive himself, "I have lost a 
little, I mean a good deal, a great deal forty- 
three thousand." 

"What! To whom? . . . Nonsense!" cried the 
count, suddenly reddening with an apoplectic 
flush over neck and nape as old people do. 

"I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicho- 
las. 

"Well! . . ."said the old count, spreading out 
his arms and sinking helplessly on the sofa. 

"It can't behelped! It happens toeveryone!" 
said the son, with a bold, free, and easy tone, 
while in his soul he regarded himself as a 
worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not 
atone for his crime. He longed to kiss his fa- 
ther's hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness, 
but said, in a careless and even rude voice, that 
it happens to everyone! 

The old count cast down his eyes on hearing 
his son's words and began bustlingly searching 
for something. 

"Yes, yes," he muttered, "it will be difficult, 
I fear, difficult to raise . . . happens to every- 
body! Yes, who has not done it?" 

And with a furtive glance at his son's face, 
the count went out of the room. . . . Nicholas 
had been prepared for resistance, but had not 
at all expected this. 

"Papa! Pa-pa!" he called after him, sobbing, 
"forgive me!" And seizing his father's hand, he 
pressed it to his lips and burst into tears. 

While father and son were having their ex- 
planation, the mother and daughter were hav- 
ing one not less important. Natdsha came run- 
ning to her mother, quite excited. , 

"Mamma! . . . Mamma! . . . He has made 
me . . ." 

"Made what?" 

"Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mam- 
ma!" she exclaimed. 

The countess did not believe her ears. Den- 
isov had proposed. To whom? To this chit of a 
girl, Natasha, who not so long ago was playing 
with dolls and who was still having lessons. 

"Don't, Natdsha! What nonsense!" she said, 
hoping it was a joke. 

"Nonsense, indeed! lamtellingyou the fact," 



BOOK 

said Natasha indignantly. "I come to ask you 
what to do, and you call it 'nonsense!' " 

The countess shrugged her shoulders. 

"If it is true that Monsieur Denfsov has made 
you a proposal, tell him he is a fool, that's all I" 

"No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indig- 
nantly and seriously. 

"Well then, what do you want? You're all in 
love nowadays. Well, if you are in love, mar- 
ry him!" said the countess, with a laugh of an- 
noyance. "Good luck to you!" 

"No, Mamma, I'm not in love with him, I 
suppose I'm not in love with him." 

"Well then, tell him so." 

"Mamma, are you cross? Don't be cross, dear! 
Is it my fault?" 

"No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want 
me to go and tell him?" said the countess smil- 
ing. 

"No, I will do it myself, only tell me what to 
say. It's all very well for you," said Natdsha, 
with a responsive smile. "You should have seen 
how he said it! I know he did not mean to say 
it, but it came out accidently." 

"Well, all the same, you must refuse him." 

"No, I mustn't. I am so sorry for him! He's 
so nice." 

"Well then, accept his offer. It's high time 
for you to be married," answered the countess 
sharply and sarcastically. 

"No, Mamma, but I'm so sorry for him. I 
don't know how I'm to say it." 

"And there's nothing for you to say. I shall 
speak to him myself," said the countess, indig- 
nant that they should have dared to treat this 
little Natdsha as grown up. 

"No, not on any account! I will tell him my- 
self, and you'll listen at the door," and Natasha 
ran across the drawing room to the dancing 
hall, where Denfsov was sitting on the same 
chair by the clavichord with his face in his 
hands. 

He jumped up at the sound of her light step. 

"Nataly," he said, moving with rapid steps 
toward her, "decide my fate. It is in your hands." 

"Vasfli Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you! . . . 
No, but you are so nice . . . but it won't do ... 
not that . . . but as a friend, I shall always love 
you." 



FOUR 193 

Denlsov bent over her hand and she heard 
strange sounds she did not understand. She 
kissed his rough curly black head. At this in- 
stant, they heard the quick rustle of the count- 
ess' dress. She came up to them. 

"Vasfli Dmitrich, I thankyou for the honor," 
she said, with an embarrassed voice, though it 
sounded severe to Denlsov "but my daughter 
is so young, and I thought that, as my son's 
friend, you would have addressed yourself 
first to me. In that case you would not have 
obliged me to give this refusal." 

"Countess . . ." said Denfsov, with downcast 
eyes and a guilty face. He tried to say more, but 
faltered. 

Natasha could not remain calm, seeing him 
in such a plight. She began to sob aloud. 

"Countess, I have done w'ong," Denfsov 
went on in an unsteady voice, "but believe me, 
I so adore your daughter and all your family 
that I would give my life twice over . . ." He 
looked at the countess, and seeing her severe 
face said: "Well, good-by, Countess," and kiss- 
ing her hand, he left the room with quick reso- 
lute strides, without looking at Natasha. 

Next day Rost6vsaw Denfsov off. He did not 
wish to stay another day in Moscow. All Denf- 
sov's Moscow friends gave him a farewell en- 
tertainment at the gypsies', with the result that 
he had no recollection of how he was put in the 
sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey. 

After Denfsov's departure, Rost6v spent an- 
other fortnight in Moscow, without going out 
of the house, waiting for the money his father 
could not at once raise, and he spent most of 
his time in the girls' room. 

S6nya was more tender and devoted to him 
than ever. It was as if she wanted to show him 
that his losses were an achievement that made 
her love him all the more, but Nicholas now 
considered himself unworthy of her. 

He filled the girls' albums with verses and 
music, and having at last sent D61okhov the 
whole forty-three thousand rubles and received 
his receipt, he left at the end of November, 
without taking leave of any of his acquaint- 
ances, to overtake his regiment which was al- 
ready in Poland. 



Book Five: 1806-07 



CHAPTER I 

AFTER HIS INTERVIEW with his wife Pierre left 
for Petersburg. At the Torzh6k post station, 
either there were no horses or the postmaster 
would not supply them. Pierre was obliged to 
wait. Without undressing, he lay down on the 
leather sofa in front of a round table, put his 
big feet in their overboots on the table, and 
began to reflect. 

"Will you have the portmanteaus brought in? 
And a bed got ready, and tea?" asked his valet. 

Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard 
nor saw anything. He had begun to think of 
the last station and was still pondering on the 
same question one so important that he took 
no notice of what went on around him. Not 
only was he indifferent as to whether he got to 
Petersburg earlier or later, or whether he se- 
cured accommodation at this station, but com- 
pared to the thoughts that now occupied him 
it was a matter of indifference whether he re- 
mained there for a few hours or for the rest of 
his life. 

The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a 
peasant woman selling Torzh6k embroidery 
came into the room offering their services. 
Without changing his careless attitude, Pierre 
looked at them over his spectacles unable to 
understand what they wanted or how they 
could go on living without having solved the 
problems that so absorbed him. He had been 
engrossed by the same thoughts ever since the 
day he returned from Sok61niki after the duel 
and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless 
night. But now, in the solitude of the journey, 
they seized him with special force. No matter 
what he thought about, he always returned to 
these same questions which he could not solve 
and yet could not cease to ask himself. It was 
as if the thread of the chief screw which held 
his life together were stripped, so that thescrew 
could not get in or out, but went on turning 
uselessly in the same place. 

The postmaster came in and began obse- 
quiously to beg his excellency to wait only two 



hours, when, come what might, he would let 
his excellency have the courier horses. It was 
plain that he was lying and only wanted to get 
more money from the traveler. 

"Is this good or bad?" Pierre asked himself. 
"It is good for me, bad for another traveler, 
and for himself it's unavoidable, because he 
needs money for food; the man said an officer 
had once given him a thrashing for letting a 
private traveler have the courier horses. But 
the officer thrashed him because he had to get 
on as quickly as possible. And I," continued 
Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because I considered 
myself injured, and Louis XVI was executed 
because they considered him a criminal, and a 
year later they executed those who executed 
him also for some reason. What is bad? What 
is good? What should one love and what hate? 
What does one live for? And what am I? What 
is life, and what is death? What power governs 
all?" 

There was no answer to any of these ques- 
tions, except one, and that not a logical answer 
and not at all a reply to them. The answer was: 
"You'll die and all will end. You'll die and 
know all, or cease asking." But dying was also 
dreadful. 

The Torzh6k peddler woman, in a whining 
voice, went on offering her wares, especially a 
pair of goatskin slippers. "I have hundreds of 
rubles I don't know what to do with, and she 
stands in her tattered cloak looking timidly at 
me," he thought. "And what does she want the 
money for? As if that money could add a hair's 
breadth to her happiness or peaceof mind. Can 
anything in the world make her or me less a 
prey to evil and death? death which ends all 
and must come today or tomorrow at any rate, 
in an instant as compared with eternity." And 
again he twisted the screw with the stripped 
thread, and again it turned uselessly in the 
same place. 

His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in 
the form of letters, by Madame de Souza. He 
began reading about the sufferings and virtu- 



'94 



BOOK FIVE 



195 



&gt;us struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. 
'And why did she resist her seducer when she 
ioved him?" he thought. "God could not have 
put into her heart an impulse that was against 
His will. My wife as she once was did not 
itruggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing 
has been found out, nothing discovered," 
Pierre again said to himself. "All we can know 
is that we know nothing. And that's the height 
-&gt;f human wisdom." 

Everything within and around him seemed 
:on fused, senseless, and repellent. Yet in this 
very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre 
found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction. 

"I make bold to ask your excellency to move 
\ little for this gentleman," said the postmaster, 
entering the room followed by another travel- 
er, also detained for lack of horses. 

The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yel- 
low-faced, wrinkled old man, with gray bushy 
eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefi- 
nite grayish color. 

Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, 
and lay down on a bed that had been got ready 
for him, glancing now and then at the newcom- 
er, who, with a gloomy and tired face, was 
wearily taking off his wraps with the aid of his 
servant, and not looking at Pierre. With a pair 
of felt boots on his thin bony legs, and keep- 
ing on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskin 
coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned 
back his big head with its broad temples and 
close-cropped hair, and looked at Beziikhov. 
The stern, shrewd, and penetrating expression 
of that look struck Pierre. He felt a wish to 
speak to the stranger, but by the time he had 
made up his mind to ask him a question about 
the roads, the traveler had closed his eyes. His 
shriveled old hands were folded and on the 
finger of one of them Pierre noticed a large cast- 
iron ring with a seal representing a death's- 
head. The stranger sat without stirring, either 
resting or, as it seemed to Pierre, sunk in pro- 
found and calm meditation. His servant was 
also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard 
or mustache, evidently not because he was shav- 
en but because they had never grown. This ac- 
tive old servant was unpacking the traveler's 
canteen and preparing tea. He brought in a 
boiling samovar. When everything was ready, 
the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the 
table, filled a tumbler with tea for himself and 
one for the beardless old man to whom he 
passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of un- 
easiness, and the need, even the inevitability, of 
entering into conversation with this stranger. 



The servant brought back his tumbler turned 
upside down, 1 with an unfinished bit of nib- 
bled sugar, and asked if anything more would 
be wanted. 

"No. Give me the book," said the stranger. 

The servant handed him a book which 
Pierre took to be a devotional work, and the 
traveler became absorbed in it. Pierre looked 
at him. All at once the stranger closed the book, 
putting in a marker, and again, leaning with 
his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his 
former position with his eyes shut. Pierre looked 
at him and had not time to turn away when the 
old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady and 
severe gaze straight on Pierre's face. 

Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that 
look, but the bright old eyes attracted him ir- 
resistibly. 

CHAPTER II 

"I HAVE THE PLEASURE of addressing Count Be- 
ziikhov, if I am not mistaken," said the stran- 
ger in a deliberate and loud voice. 

Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him 
over his spectacles. 

"I have heard of you, my dear sir," continued 
the stranger, "and of your misfortune." He 
seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to say 
"Yes, misfortune! Call it what you please, I 
know that what happened to you in Moscow 
was a misfortune." "I regret it very much, my 
dear sir." 

Pierre flushed and, hurriedly putting his legs 
down from the bed, bent forward toward the 
old man with a forced and timid smile. 

"I have not referred to this out of curiosity, 
my dear sir, but for greater reasons." 

He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved 
aside on the sofa by way of inviting the other 
to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt reluctant 
to enter into conversation with this old man, 
but, submitting to him involuntarily, came up 
and sat down beside him. 

"You are unhappy, my dear sir," the stranger 
continued. "You are young and I am old. I 
should like to help you as far as lies in my 
power." 

"Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile. 
"I am very grateful to you. Where are you trav- 
eling from?" 

The stranger's face was not genial, it was 
even cold and severe, but in spite of this, both 
the face and words of his new acquaintance 
were irresistibly attractive to Pierre. 

"But if for any reason you don't feel inclined 

1 To indicate he did not want more tea. 



ig6 



WAR AND PEACE 



to talk to me," said the old man, "say so, my 
dear sir." And he suddenly smiled, in an un- 
expected and tenderly paternal way, 

"Oh no, not at all! On the contrary, I am 
very glad to make your acquaintance," said 
Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger's 
hands, he looked more closely at the ring, with 
its skulla Masonic sign. 

"Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Ma- 
son?" 

"Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the 
Freemasons," said the stranger, looking deep- 
er and deeper into Pierre's eyes. "And in their 
name and my own I hold out a brotherly hand 
to you." 

"I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wa- 
vering between the confidence the personality 
of the Freemason inspired in him and his own 
habit of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs "I am 
afraid I am very far from understanding how 
am I to put it? I am afraid my way of looking 
at the world is so*opposed to yours that we 
shall not understand one another." 

"I knowyour outlook," said the Mason, "and 
the view of life you mention, and which you 
think is the result of your own mental efforts, 
is the one held by the majority of people, and 
is the invariable fruit of pride, indolence, and 
ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if I 
had not known it I should not have addressed 
you. Your view of life is a regrettable delusion." 

"Just as I may suppose you to be deluded," 
said Pierre, with a faint smile. 

"I should never dare to say that I know the 
truth," said the Mason, whose words struck 
Pierre more and more by their precision and 
firmness. "No one can attain to truth by him- 
self. Only by laying stone on stone with the co- 
operation of all, by the millions of generations 
from our forefather Adam to our own times, is 
that temple reared which is to be a worthy 
dwelling place of the Great God," he added, 
and closed his eyes. 

"I ought to tell you that I do not believe 
... do not believe in God," said Pierre, regret- 
fully and with an effort, feeling it essential to 
speak the whole truth. 

The Mason looked intently at Pierre and 
smiled as a rich man with millions in hand 
might smile at a poor fellow who told him that 
he, poor man, had not the five rubles that 
would make him happy. 

"Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir," 
said the Mason. "You cannot know Him. You 
do not know Him and that is why you are un- 
happy." 



"Yes, yes, I am unhappy," assented Pierre. 
"But what am I to do?" 

"You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you 
are very unhappy. You do not know Him, but 
He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He 
is in thee,and even in those blasphemous words 
thou hast just uttered!" pronounced the Mason 
in a stern and tremulous voice. 

He paused and sighed, evidently trying to 
calm himself. 

"If He were not," he said quietly, "you and 
I would not be speaking of Him, my dear sir. 
Of what, of whom, are we speaking? Whom 
hast thou denied?" he suddenly asked with ex- 
ulting austerity and authority in his voice. 
"Who invented Him, if He did not exist? 
Whence came thy conception of the existence 
of such an incomprehensible Being? Why didst 
thou, and why did the whole world, conceive 
the idea of the existence of such an incompre- 
hensible Being, a Being all-powerful, eternal, 
and infinite in all His attributes? . . ." 

He stopped and remained silent for a long 
time. 

Pierre could not and did not wish to break 
this silence. 

"He exists, but to understand Him is hard," 
the Mason began again, looking not at Pierre 
but straight before him, and turning the leaves 
of his book with his old hands which from ex- 
citement he could not keep still. "If it were a 
man whose existence thou didst doubt I could 
bring him to thee, could take him by the hand 
and show him to thee. But how can I, an insig- 
nificant mortal, show His omnipotence, His in- 
finity, and all His mercy to one who is blind, 
or who shuts his eyes that he may not see or 
understand Him and may not see or under- 
stand his own vileness and sinfulness?" He 
paused again. "Who art thou? Thou dreamest 
that thou art wise because thou couldst utter 
those blasphemous words," he went on, with a 
somber and scornful smile. "And thou art more 
foolish and unreasonable than a little child, 
who, playing with the parts of a skillfully made 
watch, dares to say that, as he does not under- 
stand its use, he does not believe in the master 
who made it. To know Him is hard. . . . For 
ages, from our forefather Adam to our own 
day, we labor to attain that knowledge and are 
still infinitely far from our aim; but in our 
lack of understanding we see only our weak- 
ness and His greatness. . . ." 

Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing 
into the Mason's face with shining eyes, not 
interrupting or questioning him, but believ- 



ing with his whole soul what the stranger said. 
Whether he accepted the wise reasoning con- 
tained in the Mason's words, or believed as a 
child believes, in the speaker's tone of convic- 
tion and earnestness, or the tremor of the speak- 
er's voicewhich sometimes almost broke or 
those brilliant aged eyes grown old in this con- 
viction, or the calm firmness and certainty of 
his vocation, which radiated from his whole be- 
ing (and which struck Pierre especially by con- 
trast with his own dejection and hopelessness) 
at any rate, Pierre longed with his whole soul 
to believe and he did believe, and felt a joyful 
sense of comfort, regeneration, and return to 
life. 

"He is not to be apprehended by reason, 
but by life," said the Mason. 

"I do not understand," said Pierre, feeling 
with dismay doubts reawakening. He was 
afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness, 
in the Mason's arguments; he dreaded not to 
be able to believe in him. "I don't under- 
stand," he said, "how it is that the mind of 
man cannot attain the knowledge of which 
you speak." 

The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly 
smile. 

"The highest wisdom and truth are like the 
purest liquid we may wish to imbibe," he said. 
"Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure 
vessel and judge of its purity? Only by the in- 
ner purification of myself can I retain in some 
degree of purity the liquid I receive." 

"Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully. 

"The highest wisdom is not founded on rea- 
son alone, not on those worldly sciences of phys- 
ics, history, chemistry, and the like, into which 
intellectual knowledge is divided. The highest 
wisdom is one. The highest wisdom has but 
one science the science of the whole the sci- 
ence explaining the whole creation and man's 
place in it. To receive that science it is neces- 
sary to purify and renew one's inner self, and 
so before one can know, it is necessary to be- 
lieve and to perfect one's self. And to attain 
this end, we have the light called conscience 
that God has implanted in our souls." 

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre. 

"Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of 
the spirit, and ask thyself whether thou art con- 
tent with thyself. What -hast thou attained re- 
lying on reason only? What art thou? You are 
young, you are rich, you are clever, you are well 
educated. And what have you done with all 
these good gifts? Are you content with yourself 
and with your life?" 


BOOK FIVE 197 

"No, I hate my life," Pierre muttered, winc- 



ing. 

"Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thy- 
self; and as thou art purified, thou wilt gain 
wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir. How 
have you spent it? In riotous orgies and de- 
bauchery, receiving everything from society 
and giving nothing in return. You have be- 
come the possessor of wealth. How have you 
used it? What have you done for your neigh- 
bor? Have you ever thought of your tens of 
thousands of slaves? Have you helped them 
physically and morally? No! You have profited 
by their toil to lead a profligate life. That is 
what you have done. Have you chosen a post 
in which you might be of service to your neigh- 
bor? No! You have spent your life in idleness. 
Then you married, my dear sirtook on your- 
self responsibility for the guidance of a young 
woman; and what have you done? You have 
not helped her to find the way of truth, my 
dear sir, but have thrust her into an abyss of de- 
ceit and misery. A man offended you and you 
shot him, and you say you do not know God 
and hate your life. There is nothing strange in 
that, my dear sir!" 

After these words, the Mason, as if tired by 
his long discourse, again leaned his arms on 
the back of the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierre 
looked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost 
lifeless face and moved his lips without utter- 
ing a sound. He wished to say, "Yes, a vile, idle, 
vicious life!" but dared not break the silence. 

The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as 
old men do, and called his servant. 

"How about the horses?" he asked, without 
looking at Pierre. 

"The exchange horses have just come," an- 
swered the servant. "Will you not rest here?" 

"No, tell them to harness." 

"Can he really be going away and leaving me 
alone without having told me all, and without 
promising to help me?" thought Pierre, rising 
with downcast head; and he began to pace the 
room, glancing occasionally at the Mason. "Yes, 
I never thought of it, but I have led a con- 
temptible and profligate life, though I did not 
like it and did not want to," thought Pierre. 
"But this man knows the truth and, if he wished 
to, could disclose it to me." 

Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but 
did not dare to. The traveler, having packed 
his things with his practiced hands, began fas- 
tening his coat. When he had finished, he turned 
to Bezukhov, and said in a tone of indifferent 
politeness: 



198 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Where are you going to now, my dear sir?" 

"I? . . . I'm going to Petersburg/' answered 
Pierre, in a childlike, hesitating voice. "I thank 
you. I agree with all you have said. But do not 
suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul 
I wish to be what you would have me be, but 
I have never had help from anyone. . . . But it 
is I, above all, who am to blame for everything. 
Help me, teach me, and perhaps I may . . ." 

Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turn- 
ed away. 

The Mason remained silent for a long time, 
evidently considering. 

"Help comes from God alone," he said, "but 
such measure of help as our Order can bestow 
it will render you, my dear sir. You are going to 
Petersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski" (he 
took out his notebook and wrote a few words 
on a large sheet of paper folded in four). "Al- 
low me to give you a piece of advice. When you 
reach the capital, first of all devote some time 
to solitude and self-examination and do not 
resume your former way of life. And now I 
wish you a good journey, my dear sir," he add- 
ed, seeing that his servant had entered ". . . and 
success." 

The traveler was Joseph Alextfevich Bazd- 
ev, as Pierre saw from the postmaster's book. 
Bazde*ev had been one of the best-known Free- 
masons and Martinists,even in Novfkov's time. 
For a long while after he had gone, Pierre did 
not go to bed or order horses but paced up and 
down the room, pondering over his vicious 
past, and with a rapturous sense of beginning 
anew pictured to himself the blissful, irre- 
proachable, virtuous future that seemed to him 
so easy. It seemed to him that he had been vi- 
cious only because he had somehow forgotten 
how good it is to be virtuous. Not a trace of his 
former doubts remained in his soul. He firmly 
believed in the possibility of the brotherhood 
of men united in the aim of supporting one an- 
other in the path of virtue, and that is how 
Freemasonry presented itself to him. 

CHAPTER III 

ON REACHING Petersburg Pierre did not let 
anyone know of his arrival, he went nowhere 
and spent whole days in reading Thomas a 
Kempis, whose book had been sent him by 
someone unknown. One thing he continually 
realized as he read that book: the joy, hitherto 
unknown to him, of believing in the possibil- 
ity of attaining perfection, and in the possibil- 
ity of active brotherly love among men, which 
Joseph Alex^evich had revealed to him. A 



week after his arrival, the young Polish count, 
Willarski, whom Pierre had known slightly in 
Petersburg society, came into his room one eve- 
ning in the official and ceremonious manner 
in which D61okhov's second had called on him, 
and, having closed the door behind him and 
satisfied himself that there was nobody else in 
the room, addressed Pierre. 

"I have come to you with a message and an 
offer, Count," he said without sitting down. "A 
person of very high standing in our Brother- 
hood has made application for you to be re- 
ceived into our Order before the usual term 
and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I 
consider it a sacred duty to fulfill that person's 
wishes. Do you wish to enter the Brotherhood 
of Freemasons under my sponsorship?" 

The cold, austere tone of this man, whom he 
had almost always before met at balls, amiably 
smiling in the society of the most brilliant 
women, surprised Pierre. 

"Yes, I do wish it," said he. 

Willarski bowed his head. 

"Onemore question, Count," hesaid, "which 
I beg you to answer in all sincerity not as a 
future Mason but as an honest man: have you 
renounced your former convictions do you be- 
lieve in God?" 

Pierre considered. 

"Yes . . . yes, I believe in God," he said. 

"In that case . . ." began Willarski, but Pierre 
interrupted him. 

"Yes, I do believe in God," he repeated. 

"In that case we can go," said Willarski. "My 
carriage is at your service." 

Willarski was silent throughout the drive. 
To Pierre's inquiries as to what he must do and 
how he should answer, Willarski only replied 
that brothers more worthy than he would test 
him and that Pierre had only to tell the truth. 

Having entered the courtyard of a large 
house where the Lodge had its headquarters, 
and having ascended a dark staircase, they en- 
tered a small well-lit anteroom where they took 
off their cloaks without the aid of a servant. 
From there they passed into another room. A 
man in strange attire appeared at the door. 
Willarski, stepping toward him, said some- 
thing to him in French in an undertone and 
then went up to a small wardrobe in which 
Pierre noticed garments such as he had never 
seen before. Having taken a kerchief from the 
cupboard, Willarski bound Pierre's eyes with 
it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some 
hairs painfully in the knot. Then he drew his 
face down, kissed him, and taking him by the 



BOOK FIVE 



199 



hand led him forward. The hairs tied in the 
knot hurt Pierre and there were lines of pain 
on his face and a shamefaced smile. His huge 
figure, with arms hanging down and with a 
puckered, though smiling face, moved after 
Willarski with uncertain, timid steps. 

Having led him about ten paces, Willarski 
stopped. 

"Whatever happens to you," he said, "you 
must bear it all manfully if you have firmly re- 
solved to join our Brotherhood." (Pierre nod- 
ded affirmatively.) "When you hear a knock at 
the door, you will uncover your eyes," added 
Willarski. "I wish you courage and success," 
and, pressing Pierre's hand, he went out. 

Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the 
same way. Once or twice he shrugged his shoul- 
ders and raised his hand to the kerchief, as if 
wishing to take it off, but let it drop again. 
The five minutes spent with his eyes bandaged 
seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb, 
his legs almost gave way, it seemed to him that 
he was tired out. He experienced a variety of 
most complex sensations. He felt afraid of 
what would happen to him and still more 
afraid of showing his fear. He felt curious to 
know what was going to happen and what 
would be revealed to him; but most of all, he 
felt joyful that the moment had come when he 
would at last start on that path of regeneration 
and on the actively virtuous life of which he 
had been dreaming since he met Joseph Alex- 
evich. Loud knocks were heard at the door. Pi- 
erre took the bandage off his eyes and glanced 
around him. The room was in black darkness, 
only a small lamp was burning inside some- 
thing white. Pierre went nearer and saw that 
the lamp stood on a black table on which lay 
an open book. The book was the Gospel, and 
the white thing with the lamp inside was a hu- 
man skull with its cavities and teeth. After 
reading the first words of the Gospel: "In the 
beginning was the Word and the Word was 
with God," Pierre went round the table and 
saw a large open box filled with something. It 
was a coffin with bones inside. He was not at 
all surprised by what he saw. Hoping to enter 
on an entirely new life quite unlike the old one, 
he expected everything to be unusual, even 
more unusual than what he was seeing. A 
skull, a coffin, the Gospel it seemed to him 
that he had expected all this and even more. 
Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked 
around. "God, death, love, the brotherhood 
of man," he kept saying to himself, associat- 
ing these words with vague yet joyful ideas. 



The door opened and someone came in. 

By the dim light, to which Pierre had already 
become accustomed, he saw a rather short man. 
Having evidently come from the light into the 
darkness, the man paused, then moved with 
cautious steps toward the table and placed on 
it his small leather-gloved hands. 

This short man had on a white leather apron 
which covered his chest and part of his legs; he 
had on a kind of necklace above which rose a 
high white ruffle, outlining his rather long 
face which was lit up from below. 

"For what have you come hither?" asked the 
newcomer, turning in Pierre's direction at a 
slight rustle made by the latter. "Why have you, 
who do not believe in the truth of the light 
and who have not seen the light, come here? 
What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue, en- 
lightenment?" 

At the moment the door opened and the 
stranger came in, Pierre felt a sense of awe and 
veneration such as he had experienced in his 
boyhood at confession; he felt himself in the 
presence of one socially a complete stranger, 
yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of 
man. With bated breath and beating heart he 
moved toward the Rhetor (by which name the 
brother who prepared a seeker for entrance in- 
to the Brotherhood was known). Drawing near- 
er, he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew, 
Smolyaninov, and it mortified him to think 
that the newcomer was an acquaintance he 
wished him simply a brother and a virtuous in- 
structor. For a long time he could not utter a 
word, so that the Rhetor had to repeat his ques- 
tion. 

"Yes ... I ... I ... desire regeneration," 
Pierre uttered with difficulty. 

"Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on 
at once: "Have you any idea of the means by 
which our holy Order will help you to reach 
your aim?" said he quietly and quickly. 

"I ... hope ... for guidance . . . help ... in 
regeneration," said Pierre, with a trembling 
voice and some difficulty in utterance due to 
his excitement and to being unaccustomed to 
speak of abstract matters in Russian. 

"What is your conception of Freemasonry?" 

"I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity 
and equality of men who have virtuous aims," 
said Pierre, feeling ashamed of the inadequacy 
of his words for the solemnity of the moment, 
as he spoke. "I imagine * . ." 

"Good!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparent- 
ly satisfied with this answer. "Have you sought 
for means of attaining your aim in religion?" 



2OO 

"No, I considered it erroneous and did not 
follow it," said Pierre, so softly that the Rhetor 
did not hear him and asked him what he was 
saying. "I have been an atheist," answered 
Pierre. 

"You are seeking for truth in order to follow 
its laws in your life, therefore you seek wisdom 
and virtue. Is that not so?" said the Rhetor, 
after a moment's pause. 

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre. 

The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his 
gloved hands on his breast, and began to speak. 

"Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of 
our Order," he said, "and if this aim coincides 
with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood 
with profit. The first and chief object of our 
Order, the foundation on which it rests and 
which no human power can destroy, is the pres- 
ervation and handing on to posterity of a cer- 
tain important mystery . . . which has come 
down to us from the remotest ages, even from 
the first man a mystery on which perhaps the 
fate of mankind depends. But since this mys- 
tery is of such a nature that nobody can know 
or use it unless he be prepared by long and dil- 
igent self-purification, not everyone can hope 
to attain itquickly. Hencewe have a secondary 
aim, that of preparing our members as much as 
possible to reform their hearts, to purify and 
enlighten their minds, by means handed on to 
us by tradition from those who have striven to 
attain this mystery, and thereby to render them 
capable of receiving it. 

"By purifyingand regeneratingour members 
we try, thirdly, to improve the whole human 
race, offering it in our members an example of 
piety and virtue, and thereby try with all our 
might to combat theevil which sways the world. 
Think this over and I will come to you again." 

"To combat the evil which sways the world 
. . ." Pierre repeated, and a mental image of his 
future activity in this direction rose in his 
mind. He imagined men such as he had himself 
been a fortnight ago, and he addressed an edify- 
ing exhortation to them. He imagined to him- 
self vicious and unfortunate people whom he 
would assist by word and deed, imagined op- 
pressors whose victims he would rescue. Of the 
three objects mentioned by the Rhetor, this 
last, that of improving mankind, especially ap- 
pealed to Pierre. The important mystery men- 
tioned by the Rhetor, though it aroused his cu- 
riosity, did not seem to him essential, and the 
second aim, that of purifying and regenerating 
himself, did not much interest him because at 
that moment he felt with delight that he was 



WAR AND PEACE 



already perfectly cured of his former faults and 
was ready for all that was good. 

Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to 
inform the seeker of the seven virtues, corre- 
sponding to the seven steps of Solomon's tem- 
ple, which every Freemason should cultivate in 
himself. These virtues were: i. Discretion, the 
keeping of the secrets of the Order. 2. Obedi- 
ence to those of higher ranks in the Order. 
3. Morality. 4. Love of mankind. 5. Courage. 
6. Generosity. 7. The love of death. 

"In the seventh place, try, by the frequent 
thought of death," the Rhetor said, "to bring 
yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, but 
as a friend that frees the soul grown weary in 
the labors of virtue from this distressful life, 
and leads it to its place of recompense and 
peace." 

"Yes, that must be so," thought Pierre, when 
after these words the Rhetor went away, leav- 
ing him to solitary meditation. "It must be so, 
but I am still so weak that I love my life, the 
meaning of which is only now gradually open- 
ing before me." But five of the other virtues 
which Pierre recalled, counting them on his 
fingers, he felt already in his soul: courage, 
generosity, morality, love of mankind, and es- 
pecially obedience which did not even seem to 
him a virtue, but a joy. (He now felt so glad to 
be free from his own lawlessness and to sub- 
mit his will to those who knew the indubitable 
truth.) He forgot what the seventh virtue was 
and could not recall it. 

The third time the Rhetor came back more 
quickly and asked Pierre whether he was still 
firm in his intention and determined to sub- 
mit to all that would be required of him. 

"I am ready for everything," said Pierre. 

"I must also inform you," said the Rhetor, 
"that our Order delivers its teaching not in 
words only but also by other means, which may 
perhaps have a stronger effect on the sincere 
seeker after wisdom and virtue than mere 
words. This chamberwith what yousee therein 
should already have suggested to your heart, 
if it is sincere, more than words could do. You 
will perhaps also see in your further initiation 
a like method of enlightenment. Our Order 
imitates the ancient societies that explained 
their teaching by hieroglyphics. A hieroglyph," 
said the Rhetor, "is an emblem of something 
not cognizable by the senses but which possess- 
es qualities resembling those of the symbol." 

Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph 
was, but dared not speak. He listened to the 
Rhetor in silence, feeling from all he said that 



BOOK FIVE 



his ordeal was about to begin. 

"If you are resolved, I must begin your ini- 
tiation/ 1 said the Rhetor coming closer to 
Pierre. "In token of generosity I ask you to 
give me all your valuables." 

"But I have nothing here," replied Pierre, 
supposing that he was asked to give up all he 
possessed. 

"What you have with you: watch, money, 
rings. . . ." 

Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, 
but could not manage for some time to get the 
wedding ring off his fat finger. When that had 
been done, the Rhetor said: 

"In token of obedience, I ask you to undress." 

Pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left 
boot according to the Rhetor's instructions. 
The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre's 
left breast, and stooping down pulled up the 
left leg of his trousers to above the knee. 
Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right 
boot also and was going to tuck up the other 
trouser leg to save this stranger the trouble, 
but the Mason told him that was not neces- 
sary and gave him a slipper for his left foot. 
With a childlike smile of embarrassment, 
doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on 
his face against his will, Pierre stood with his 
arms hanging down and legs apart, before 
his brother Rhetor, and awaited his further 
commands. 

"And now, in token of candor, I ask you to 
reveal to me your chief passion," said the lat- 
ter. 

"My passion! I have had so many," replied 
Pierre. 

"That passion which more than all others 
caused you to waver on the path of virtue," 
said the Mason. 

Pierre paused, seeking a reply. 

"Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irri- 
tability? Anger? Women?" He went over his 
vices in his mind, not knowing to which of 
them to give the pre-eminence. 

"Women," he said in a low, scarcely audible 
voice. 

The Mason did not move and for a long 
time said nothing after this answer. At last he 
moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief 
that lay on the table, again bound his eyes. 

"For the last time I say to you turn all your 
attention upon yourself, put a bridle on your 
senses, and seek blessedness, not in passion but 
in your own heart. The source of blessedness 
is not without us but within. . . ." 

Pierre had already long been feeling in him- 



201 

self that refreshing source of blessedness which 
now flooded his heart with glad emotion. 

CHAPTER IV 

SOON AFTER THIS there came into the dark cham- 
ber to fetch Pierre, not the Rhetor but Pierre's 
sponsor, Willarski, whom he recognized by his 
voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of 
his resolution Pierre replied: "Yes, yes, I agree," 
and with a beaming, childlike smile, his fat 
chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and timid- 
ly in one slippered and one booted foot, he ad- 
vanced, while Willarski held a sword to his 
bare chest. He was conducted from that room 
along passages that turned backwards and for- 
wards and was at last brought to the doors of 
the Lodge. Willarski coughed, he was answered 
by the Masonic knock with mallets, the doors 
opened before them. A bass voice (Pierre was 
still blindfold) questioned him as to who he 
was, when and where he was born, and so on. 
Then he was again led somewhere still blind- 
fold, and as they went along he was told alle- 
gories of the toils of his pilgrimage, of holy 
friendship, of the Eternal Architect of the uni- 
verse, and of the courage with which he should 
endure toils and dangers. During these wander- 
ings, Pierre noticed that he was spoken of now 
as the "Seeker," now as the "Sufferer," and now 
as the "Postulant," to the accompaniment of 
various knockings with mallets and swords. As 
he was being led up to some object he noticed 
a hesitation and uncertainty among his con- 
ductors. He heard those around him disput- 
ing in whispers and one of them insisting that 
he should be led along a certain carpet. After 
that they took his right hand, placed it on 
something, and told him to hold a pair of com- 
passes to his left breast with the other hand and 
to repeat after someone who read aloud an oath 
of fidelity to the laws of the Order. The candles 
were then extinguished and some spirit lighted, 
as Pierre knew by the smell, and he was told 
that he would now see the lesser light. The 
bandage was taken off his eyes and, by the faint 
light of the burning spirit, Pierre, as in a dream, 
saw several men standing before him, wearing 
aprons like the Rhetor's and holding swords in 
their hands pointed at his breast. Among them 
stood a man whose white shirt was stained with 
blood. On seeing this, Pierre moved forward 
with his breast toward the swords, meaning 
them to pierce it. But the swords were drawn 
back from him and he was at once blindfold- 
ed again. 
"Now thou hast seen the lesser light," ut- 



202 

tered a voice. Then the candles were relit and 
he was told that he would see the full light; the 
bandage was again removed and more than 
ten voices said together: "Sic transit gloria mun- 
di." 

Pierre gradually began to recover himself 
and looked about at the room and at the peo- 
ple in it. Round a long table covered with 
black sat some twelve men in garments like 
those he had already seen. Some of them 
Pierre had met in Petersburg society. In the 
President's chair sat a young man he did not 
know, with a peculiar cross hanging from his 
neck. On his right sat the Italian abb whom 
Pierre had met at Anna Pavlovna's two years 
before. There were also present a very distin- 
guished dignitary and a Swiss who had former- 
ly been tutor at the Kuragins'. All maintained 
a solemn silence, listening to the words of the 
President, who held a mallet in his hand. Let 
into the wall was a star-shaped light. At one 
side of the table was a small carpet with var- 
ious figures worked upon it, at the other was 
something resembling an altar on which lay 
a Testament and a skull. Round it stood seven 
large candlesticks like those used in churches. 
Two of the brothers led Pierre up to the altar, 
placed his feet at right angles, and bade him lie 
down, saying that he must prostrate himself 
at the Gates of the Temple. 

"He must first receive the trowel," whispered 
one of the brothers. 

"Oh, hush, please!" said another. 

Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his 
shortsighted eyes without obeying, and sud- 
denly doubts arose in his mind. "Where am I? 
What am I doing? Aren't they laughing at me? 
Shan't I be ashamed to remember this?" But 
these doubts only lasted a moment. Pierre 
glanced at the serious faces of those around, re- 
membered all he had already gone through, 
and realized that he could not stop halfway. 
He was aghast at his hesitation and, trying to 
arouse his former devotional feeling, prostrat- 
ed himself before the Gates of the Temple. 
And really, the feeling of devotion returned to 
him even more strongly than before. When he 
had lain there some time, he was told to get up, 
and a white leather apron, such as the others 
wore, was put on him: he was given a trowel 
and three pairs of gloves, and then the Grand 
Master addressed him. He told him that he 
should try to do nothing to stain the whiteness 
of that apron, which symbolized strength and 
purity; then of the unexplained trowel, he 
told him to toil with it to cleanse his own heart 



WAR AND PEACE 



from vice, and indulgently to smooth with it 
the heart of his neighbor. As to the first pair of 
gloves, a man's, he said that Pierre could not 
know their meaning but must keep them. The 
second pair of man's gloves he was to wear at 
the meetings, and finally of the third, a pair of 
women's gloves, he said: "Dear brother, these 
woman's gloves are intended for you too. Give 
them to the woman whom you shall honor 
most of all. This gift will be a pledge of your 
purity of heart to her whom you select to be your 
worthy helpmeet in Masonry." And after a 
pause, he added: "But beware, dear brother, 
that these gloves do not deck hands that are 
unclean." While the Grand Master said these 
last words it seemed to Pierre that he grew em- 
barrassed. Pierre himself grew still more con- 
fused, blushed like a child till tears came to 
his eyes, began looking about him uneasily, 
and an awkward pause followed. 

This silence was broken by one of the breth- 
ren, who led Pierre up to the rug and began 
reading to him from a manuscript book an ex- 
planation of all the figures on it: the sun, the 
moon, a hammer, a plumb line, a trowel, a 
rough stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three 
windows, and so on. Then a place was assigned 
to Pierre, he was shown the signs of the Lodge, 
told the password, and at last was permitted to 
sit down. The Grand Master began reading the 
statutes. They were very long, and Pierre, from 
joy, agitation, and embarrassment, was not in 
a state to understand what was being read. He 
managed to follow only the last words of the 
statutes and these remained in his mind. 

"In our temples we recognize no other dis- 
tinctions," read the Grand Master, "but those 
between virtue and vice. Beware of making any 
distinctions which may infringe equality. Fly 
to a brother's aid whoever he may be, exhort 
him who goeth astray, raise him that falleth, 
never bear malice or enmity toward thy broth- 
er. Be kindly and courteous. Kindle in all 
hearts the flame of virtue. Share thy happiness 
with thy neighbor, and may envy never dim the 
purity of that bliss. Forgive thy enemy, do not 
avenge thyself except by doing him good. Thus 
fulfilling the highest law thou shalt regain 
traces of the ancient dignity which thou hast 
lost." 

He finished and, getting up, embraced and 
kissed Pierre, who, with tears of joy in his eyes, 
looked round him, not knowing how to answer 
the congratulations and greetings from ac- 
quaintances that met him on all sides. He ac- 
knowledged no acquaintances but saw in all 



BOOK FIVE 



203 



these men only brothers, and burned with im- 
patience to set to work with them. 

The Grand Master rapped with his mallet. 
All the Masons sat down in their places, and 
one of them read an exhortation on the neces- 
sity of humility. 

The Grand Master proposed that the last du- 
ty should be performed, and the distinguished 
dignitary who bore the title of "Collector of 
Alms" went round to all the brothers. Pierre 
would have liked to subscribe all he had, but 
fearing that it might look like pride subscribed 
the same amount as the others. 

The meeting was at an end, and on reaching 
home Pierre felt as if he had returned from a 
long journey on which he had spent dozens of 
years, had become completely changed, and 
had quite left behind his former habits and 
way of life. 

CHAPTERV 

THE DAY AFTER he had been received into the 
Lodge, Pierre was sitting at home reading a 
book and trying to fathom the significance of 
the Square, one side of which symbolized God, 
another moral things, a third physical things, 
and the fourth a combination of these. Now 
and then his attention wandered from the book 
and the Square and he formed in imagination 
a new plan of life. On the previous evening at 
the Lodge, he had heard that a rumor of his 
duel had reached the Emperor and that it 
would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. 
Pierre proposed going to his estates in the 
south and there attending to the welfare of his 
serfs. He was joyfully planning this new life, 
when Prince Vasili suddenly entered the room. 

"My dear fellow, what have you been up to 
in Moscow? Why have you quarreled with 
Hlne, mon cherf You are under a delusion," 
said Prince Vasili, as he entered. "I know all 
about it, and I can tell you positively that He*- 
lene is as innocent before you as Christ was be- 
fore the Jews." 

Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasili 
interrupted him. 

"And why didn't you simply come straight to 
me as to a friend? I know all about it and un- 
derstand it all," he said. "You behaved as be- 
comes a man who values his honor, perhaps too 
hastily, but we won't go into that. But consid- 
er the position in which you are placing her 
and me in the eyes of society, and even of the 
court," he added, lowering his voice. "She is 
living in Moscow and you are here. Remember, 
dear boy," and he drew Pierre's arm down- 



wards, "it is simply a misunderstanding. I ex- 
pect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her a 
letter at once, and she'll come here and all 
will be explained, or else, my dear boy, let me 
tell you it's quite likely you'll have to suffer 
for it." 

Prince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look. 

"I know from reliable sources that the Dow- 
ager Empress is taking a keen interest in the 
whole affair. You know she is very gracious to 



Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on 
one hand, Prince Vasfli did not let him and, on 
the other, Pierre himself feared to begin to 
speak in the tone of decided refusal and dis- 
agreement in which he had firmly resolved to 
answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the words 
of the Masonic statutes, "be kindly and courte- 
ous," recurred to him. He blinked, went red, 
got up and sat down again, struggling with 
himself to do what was for him the most diffi- 
cult thing in lifeto say an unpleasant thing 
to a man's face, to say what the other, whoever 
he might be, did not expect. He was so used to 
submitting to Prince Vasili's tone of careless 
self-assurance that he felt he would be unable 
to withstand it now, but he also felt that on 
what he said now his future depended wheth- 
er he would follow the same old road, or that 
new path so attractively shown him by the Ma- 
sons, on which he firmly believed he would be 
reborn to a new life. 

"Now, dear boy," said Prince Vasili playful- 
ly, "say 'yes,' and I'll write to her myself, and 
we will kill the fatted calf." 

But before Prince Vasili had finished his 
playful speech, Pierre, without looking at him, 
and with a kind of fury that made him like his 
father, muttered in a whisper: 

"Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please 
gol" And he jumped up and opened the door 
for him. 

"Gol" he repeated, amazed at himself and 
glad to see the look of confusion and fear that 
showed itself on Prince Vasili's face. 

"What's the matter with you? Are you ill?" 

"Gol" the quivering voice repeated. And 
Prince Vasili had to go without receiving any 
explanation. 

A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of 
his new friends, the Masons, and leaving large 
sums of money with them for alms, went away 
to his estates. His new brethren gave him let- 
ters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons and prom- 
ised to write to him and guide him in his new 
activity. 



204 



WAR AND PEACE 



CHAPTER VI 

THE DUEL between Pierre and D61okhov was 
hushed up and, in spite of the Emperor's se- 
verity regarding duels at that time, neither the 
principals nor their seconds suffered for it. 
But the story of the duel, confirmed by Pierre's 
rupture with his wife, was the talk of society. 
Pierre who had been regarded with patroniz- 
ing condescension when he was an illegitimate 
son, and petted and extolled when he was the 
best match in Russia, had sunk greatly in the 
esteem of society after his marriage when the 
marriageable daughters and their mothers had 
nothing to hope from himespecially as he did 
not know how, and did not wish, to court so- 
ciety's favor. Now he alone was blamed for 
what had happened, he was said to be insanely 
jealous and subject like his father to fits of 
bloodthirsty rage. And when after Pierre's de- 
parture Hlene returned to Petersburg, she 
was received by all her acquaintances not only 
cordially, but even with a shade of deference 
due to her misfortune. When conversation 
turned on her husband Hlene assumed a dig- 
nified expression, which with characteristic 
tact she had acquired though she did not un- 
derstand its significance. This expression sug- 
gested that she had resolved to endure her 
troubles uncomplainingly and that her hus- 
band was a cross laid upon her by God. Prince 
Vasfli expressed his opinion more openly. He 
shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was men- 
tioned and, pointing to his forehead, remarked: 
"A bit touched I always said so." 
"I said from the first," declared Anna Pav- 
lovna referring to Pierre, "I said at the time 
and before anyone else" (she insisted on her 
priority) "that that senseless young man was 
spoiled by the depraved ideas of these days. I 
said so even at the time when everybody was 
in raptures about him, when he had just re- 
turned from abroad, and when, if you remem- 
ber, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my 
soirees. And how has it ended? I was against 
this marriage even then and foretold all that 
has happened." 

Anna Pavlovna continued to give on free eve- 
nings the same kind of soirees as before such 
as she alone had the gift of arranging at which 
was to be found "the cream of really good so- 
ciety, the bloom of the intellectual essence of 
Petersburg," as she herself put it. Besides this 
refined selection of society Anna Pdvlovna's 
receptions were also distinguished by the fact 
that she always presented some new and inter- 
esting person to the visitors and that nowhere 



else was the state of the political thermometer 
of legitimate Petersburg court society so clear- 
ly and distinctly indicated. 

Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad 
details of Napoleon's destruction of the Prus- 
sian army at Jena and Auerstadt and the sur- 
render of most of the Prussian fortresses had 
been received, when our troops had already 
entered Prussia and our second war with Na- 
poleon was beginning, Anna Pavlovna gave one 
of her soirees. The "cream of really good soci- 
ety" consisted of the fascinating Hlne, for- 
saken by her husband, Mortemart, the delight- 
ful Prince Hippolyte who had just returned 
from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a 
young man referred to in that drawing room as 
"a man of great merit" (un homme de beau- 
coup de mMte), a newly appointed maid of 
honor and her mother, and several other less 
noteworthy persons. 

The novelty Anna Pdvlovna was setting be- 
fore her guests that evening was Boris Drubet- 
sk6y, who had just arrived as a special mes- 
senger from the Prussian army and was aide- 
de-camp to a very important personage. 

The temperature shown by the political 
thermometer to the company that evening was 
this: 

"Whatever the European sovereigns and com- 
manders may do to countenance Bonaparte, 
and to cause me y and us in general, annoyance 
and mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte 
cannot alter. We shall not cease to express our 
sincere views on that subject, and can only say 
to the Kingof Prussia and others: 'So much the 
worse for you. Tu Vas voulu, George Dandin,' l 
that's all we have to say about it!" 

When Boris, who was to be served up to the 
guests, entered the drawing room, almost all 
the company had assembled, and the conversa- 
tion, guided by Anna Pdvlovna, was about our 
diplomatic relations with Austria and the hope 
of an alliance with her. 

Boris, grown more manly and looking fresh, 
rosy and self-possessed, entered the drawing 
room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an 
aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay 
his respects to the aunt and then brought back 
to the general circle. 

Anna Pavlovna gave him her shriveled hand 
to kiss and introduced him to several persons 
whom he did not know, giving him a whispered 
description of each. 

"Prince Hippolyte Kurdgin charming 

1 "You would have it so." George Dandin is a 
comedy by Moli&amp;re. TR, 



BOOK FIVE 



205 



young fellow; M. Kronqcharg d'affaires from 
Copenhagen a profound intellect/' and sim- 
ply, "Mr. Shftov a man of great merit" this 
of the man usually so described. 

Thanks to Anna Mikhdylovna's efforts, his 
own tastes, and the peculiarities of his reserved 
nature, Boris had managed during his service 
to place himself very advantageously. He was 
aide-de-camp to a very important personage, 
had been sent on a very important mission to 
Prussia, and had just returned from there as a 
special messenger. He had become thoroughly 
conversant with that unwritten code with which 
he had been so pleased at Olmutz and accord- 
ing to which an ensign might rank incompa- 
rably higher than a general, and according to 
which what was needed for success in the serv- 
- ice was not effort or work, or courage, or perse- 
verance, but only the knowledge of how to get 
on with those who can grant rewards, and he 
was himself often surprised at the rapidity of 
his success and at the inability of others* to un- 
derstand these things. In consequence of this 
discovery his whole manner of life, all his re- 
lations with old friends, all his plans for his 
future, were completely altered. He was not 
rich, but would spend his last groat to be bet- 
ter dressed than others, and would rather de- 
prive himself of many pleasures than allow 
himself to be seen in a shabby equipage or ap- 
pear in the streets of Petersburg in an old uni- 
form. He made friends with and sought the ac- 
quaintance of only those above him in posi- 
tion and who could therefore be of use to him. 
He liked Petersburg and despised Moscow. 
The remembrance of the Rostovs' house and 
of his childish love for Natasha was unpleasant 
to him and he had not once been to see the 
Rost6vs since the day of his departure for the 
army. To be in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room 
he considered an important step up in the serv- 
ice, and he at once understood his role, letting 
his hostess make use of whatever interest he 
had to offer. He himself carefully scanned each 
face, appraising the possibilities of establish- 
ing intimacy with each of those present, and 
the advantages that might accrue. He took the 
seat indicated to him beside the fair He"lene 
and listened to the general conversation. 

"Vienna considers the bases of the proposed 
treaty so unattainable that not even a continu- 
ity of most brilliant successes would secure 
them, and she doubts the means we have of 
gaining them. That is the actual phrase used 
by the Vienna cabinet/' said the Danish charge* 
d'affaires. 



"The doubt is flattering/' said "the man of 
profound intellect/' with a subtle smile. 

"We must distinguish between the Vienna 
cabinet and the Emperor of Austria/' said 
Mortemart. "The Emperor of Austria can nev- 
er have thought of such a thing, it is only the 
cabinet that says it." 

"Ah, my dear vicomte," put in Anna Pdvlov- 
na, "L'Urope" (for some reason she called it 
Urope as if that were a specially refined French 
pronunciation which she could allow herself 
when con versing with a Frenchman), "L'Urope 
ne sera jamais noire allide sincere." l 

After that Anna Pavlovna led up to the 
courage and firmness of the King of Prussia, in 
order to draw Boris into the conversation. 

Boris listened attentively to each of the 
speakers, awaitinghis turn, but managed mean- 
while to look round repeatedly at his neigh" 
bor, the beautiful He4ene, whose eyes severa* 
times met those of the handsome young aide 
de-camp with a smile. "&gt; 

Speaking of the position of Prussia, Ann' 
Pdvlovna very naturally asked Boris to te v 
them about his journey to Glogau and in wha 1 
state he found the Prussian army. Boris, speak- 
ing with deliberation, told them in pure, cor- 
rect French many interesting details about 
the armies and the court, carefully abstaining 
from expressing an opinion of his own about 
the facts he was recounting. For some time 
he engrossed the general attention, and 
Anna Pdvlovna felt that the novelty she 
had served up was received with pleasure by 
all her visitors. The greatest attention of 
all to Boris* narrative was shown by Hlne. 
She asked him several questions about his 
journey and seemed greatly interested in 
the state of the Prussian army. As soon as he 
had finished she turned to him with her usual 
smile. 

"You absolutely must come and see me," she 
said in a tone that implied that, for certain con- 
siderations he could not know of, this was ab- 
solutely necessary. 

"On Tuesday between eight and nine. It 
will give me great pleasure." 

Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was 
about to begin a conversation with her, when 
Anna PAvlovna called him away on the pretext 
that her aunt wished to hear him. 

"You know her husband, of course?" said 
Anna Pdvlovna, dosing her eyes and indicat- 
ing Hdene with a sorrowful gesture. "Ah, she 
is such an unfortunate and channing woman ! 

1 "Europe will never be our sincere ally." 



206 



WAR AND PEACE 



Don't mention him before her please don't I It 
is too painful for her!" 

CHAPTER VII 

WHEN BORIS and Anna Pdvlovna returned to 
the others Prince Hippolyte had the ear of the 
company. 

Bending forward in his armchair he said: 
"Le Roi de Prusse!" and having said this 
laughed. Everyone turned toward him. 

"Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said inter- 
rogatively, again laughing, and then calmly 
and seriously sat back in his chair. Anna Pdv- 
lovna waited for him to go on, but asheseemed 
quite decided to say no more she began to tell 
of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had 
stolen the sword of Frederick the Great. 

"It is the sword of Frederick the Great which 

. . ." she began, but Hippolyte interrupted 
icr with the words: "Le Roi de Prusse . . ." and 
tgain,assoon as all turned toward him, excused 
timself and said no more. 

Anna Pdvlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hip- 
KByte's friend, addressed him firmly. 

"Come now, what about your R oide Prusse?" 

Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laugh- 
ing. 

"Oh, it's nothing. I only wished to say . . ." 
(he wanted to repeat a joke he had heard in 
Vienna and which he had been trying all that 
evening to get in) "I only wished to say that 
we are wrong to fight pour le Roi de Prusse!" l 

Boris smiled circumspectly, so that it might 
be taken as ironical or appreciative according 
to the way the joke was received. Everybody 
laughed. 

"Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," 
said Anna Pdvlovna, shaking her little shriveled 
finger at him. 

"We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse f 
but for right principles. Oh, that wicked Prince 
Hippolyte!" she said. 

The conversation did not flag all evening 
and turned chiefly on the political news. It be- 
came particularly animated toward the end of 
the evening when the rewards bestowed by the 
Emperor were mentioned. 

"You know N N received a snuffbox with 
the portrait last year?" said "the man of pro- 
found intellect." "Why shouldn't S- S- get 
the same distinction?" 

"Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor's 
portrait is a reward but not a distinction," said 
the diplomatist "a gift, rather." 

14 Tor the King of Prussia" a phrase used in 
French to denote "for a trifle of no value." TR. 



"There are precedents, I may mention 
Schwarzenberg." 

"It's impossible," replied another. 

"Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a 
different matter " 

When everybody rose to go, Hlne who 
had spoken very little all the evening again 
turned to Boris, asking him in a tone of caress- 
ing significant command to come to her on 
Tuesday. 

"It is of great importance to me," she said, 
turning with a smile toward Anna Pdvlovna, 
and Anna Pdvlovna, with the same sad smile 
with which she spoke of her exalted patroness, 
supported Hdtene's wish. 

It seemed as if from some words Boris had 
spoken that evening about the Prussian army, 
Hlne had suddenly found it necessary to see 
him. She seemed to promise to explain that ne- 
cessity to him when he came on Tuesday. 

But on Tuesday evening, having come to 
Hlrte's splendid salon, Boris received no clear 
explanation of why it had been necessary for 
him to come. There were other guests and the 
countess talked little to him, and only as he 
kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpect- 
edly and in a whisper, with a strangely unsmil- 
ing face: "Come to dinner tomorrow ... in the 
evening. You must come . . . Come!" 

During that stay in Petersburg, Boris became 
an intimate in the countess* house. 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE WAR was flaming up and nearing the Rus- 
sian frontier. Everywhere one heard curses on 
Bonaparte, "the enemy of mankind." Militia- 
men and recruits were being enrolled in the 
villages, and from the seat of war came contra- 
dictory news, false as usual and therefore vari- 
ously interpreted. The life of old Prince Bol- 
k6nski, Prince Andrew, and Princess Mary had 
greatly changed since 1805. 

In 1806 the old prince was made one of the 
eight commanders in chief then appointed to 
supervise the enrollment decreed throughout 
Russia. Despite the weakness of age, which had 
become particularly noticeable since the time 
when he thought his son had been killed, he 
did not think it right to refuse a duty to which 
he had been appointed by the Emperor him- 
self, and this fresh opportunity for action gave 
him new energy and strength. He was continu- 
ally traveling through the three provinces en- 
trusted to him, was pedantic in the fulfillment 
of his duties, severe to cruelty with his subordi- 
nates, and went into everything down to the 



BOOK FIVE 



207 



minutest details himself. Princess Mary had 
ceased taking lessons in mathematics from her 
father, and when the old prince was at home 
went to his study with the wet nurse and little 
Prince Nicholas (as his grandfather called 
him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his 
wet nurse and nurse Sdvishna in the late prin- 
cess 1 rooms and Princess Mary spent most of 
the day in the nursery, taking a mother's place 
to her little nephew as best she could. Made- 
moiselle Bourienne, too, seemed passionately 
fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often de- 
prived herself to give her friend the pleasure 
of dandling the little angel as she called her 
nephew and playing with him. 

Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills 
there was a chapel over the tomb of the little 
princess, and in this chapel was a marble monu- 
ment brought from Italy, representingan angel 
with outspread wings ready to fly upwards. 
The angel's upper lip was slightly raised as 
though about to smile, and once on coming 
out of the chapel Prince Andrew and Princess 
Mary admitted to one another that the angel's 
face reminded them strangely of the little prin- 
cess. But what was still stranger, though of this 
Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was 
that in the expression the sculptor had hap- 
pened to give the angel's face, Prince Andrew 
read the same mild reproach he had read on 
the face of his dead wife: "Ah, why have you 
done this to me?" 

Soon after Prince Andrew's return the old 
prince made over to him a large estate, Bogu- 
chdrovo, about twenty-five miles from Bald 
Hills. Partly because of the depressing memo- 
ries associated with Bald Hills, partly because 
Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to 
bearing with his father's peculiarities, and part- 
ly because he needed solitude, Prince Andrew 
made use of Bogucharovo, began building and 
spent most of his time there. 

After the Austerlitz campaign Prince An- 
drew had firmly resolved not to continue his 
military service, and when the war recom- 
menced and everybody had to serve, he took a 
post under his father in the recruitment so as 
to avoid active service. The old prince and his 
son seemed to have changed roles since the 
campaign of 1805. The old man, roused by ac- 
tivity, expected the best results from the new 
campaign, while Prince Andrew on the con- 
trary, taking no part in the war and secretly 
regretting this, saw only the dark side. 

On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off 
on one of his circuits. Prince Andrew remained 



at Bald Hills as usual during his father's ab- 
sence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for 
four days. The coachman who had driven the 
old prince to town returned bringing papers 
and letters for Prince Andrew. 

Not finding the young prince in his study 
the valet went with the letters to Princess 
Mary's apartments, but did not find him there. 
He was told that the prince had gone to the 
nursery. 

"If you please, your excellency, Petriisha has 
brought some papers," said one of the nurse- 
maids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a 
child's little chair while, frowning and with 
trembling hands, he poured drops from a medi- 
cine bottle into a wineglass half full of water. 

"What is it?" he said crossly, and, his hand 
shaking unintentionally, he poured too many 
drops into the glass. He threw the mixture on- 
to the floor and asked for some more water. 
The maid brought it. 

There were in the room a child's cot, two 
boxes, two armchairs, a table, a child's table, 
and the little chair on which Prince Andrew 
was sitting. The curtains were drawn, and a 
single candle was burningon the table, screened 
by a bound music book so that the light did not 
fall on the cot. 

"My dear," said Princess Mary, addressing 
her brother from beside the cot where she was 
standing, "better wait a bit ... later . . ." 

"Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and 
keep putting things off and this is what comes 
of itl" said Prince Andrew in an exasperated 
whisper, evidently meaning to wound his sis- 
ter. 

"My dear, really . . . it's better not to wake 
him . . . he's asleep," said the princess in a tone 
of entreaty. 

Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe 
up to the little bed, wineglass in hand. 

"Perhaps we'd really better not wake him," 
he said hesitating. 

"As you please . . . really ... I think so ... 
but as you please," said Princess Mary, evident- 
ly intimidated and confused that her opinion 
had prevailed. She drew her brother's atten- 
tion to the maid who was calling him in a whis- 
per. 

It was the second night that neither of them 
had slept, watching the boy who was in a high 
fever. These last days, mistrusting their house- 
hold doctor and expecting another for whom 
they had sent to town, they had been trying 
first one remedy and then another. Worn out 
by sleeplessness and anxiety they threw their 



208 



WAR AND PEACE 



burden of sorrow on one another, and re- 
proached and disputed with each other. 

"Petriisha has come with papers from your 
father," whispered the maid. 

Prince Andrew went out. 

"Devil take them!" he muttered, and after 
listening to the verbal instructions his father 
had sent and taking the correspondence and 
his father's letter, he returned to the nursery. 

"Well?" he asked. 

"Still the same. Wait, for heaven's sake. Karl 
Ivnich always says that sleep is more impor- 
tant than anything," whispered Princess Mary 
with a sigh. 

Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt 
him. He was burning hot. 

"Confound you and your Karl Ivdnich!" He 
took the glass with the drops and again went 
up to the cot. 

"Andrew, don't!" said Princess Mary. 

But he scowled at her angrily though also 
with suffering in his eyes, and stooped glass in 
hand over the infant. 

"But I wish it," he said. "I beg yougive it 
him!" 

Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but 
took the glass submissively and calling the 
nurse began giving the medicine. The child 
screamed hoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, 
clutching his head, went out and sat down on 
a sofa in the next room. 

He still had all the letters in his hand. Open- 
ing them mechanically he began reading. The 
old prince, now and then using abbreviations, 
wrote in his large elongated hand on blue pa- 
per as follows : 

Have just this moment received by special mes- 
senger very joyful newsif it's not false. Bennig- 
sen seems to have obtained a complete victory over 
Buonaparte at Eyiau. In Petersburg everyone is 
rejoicing, and the rewards sent to the army are 
innumerable. Though he is a German I congrat- 
ulate him! I can't make out what the commander 
at K6rchevo a certain Khandrik6v is up to; till 
now the additional men and provisions have not 
arrived. Gallop off to him at once and say I'll have 
his head off if everything is not here in a week. 
Have received another letter about the Preussisch- 
Eylau battle from P&amp;enka he took part in it 
and it's all true. When mischief-makers don't med- 
dle even a German beats Buonaparte. He is said to 
be fleeing in great disorder. Mind you gallop off to 
K6rchevo without delay and carry out instruc- 
tions! 

Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of 
another envelope. It was a closely written let- 
ter of two sheets from Bilibin. He folded it up 



without reading it and reread his father's let- 
ter, ending with the words: "Gallop off to K6r- 
chevo and carry out instructions!" 

"No, pardon me, I won't go now till the 
child is better," thought he, going to the door 
and looking into the nursery. 

Princess Mary was still standing by the cot, 
gently rocking the baby. 

"Ah yes, and what else did he say that's un- 
pleasant?" thought Prince Andrew, recalling 
his father's letter. "Yes, we have gained a vic- 
tory over Bonaparte, just when I'm not serv- 
ing. Yes, yes, he's always poking fun at me 

Ah, well! Let him!" And he began reading Bil- 
ibin's letter which was written in French. He 
read without understanding half of it, read on- 
ly to forget, if but for a moment, what he had 
too long been thinking of so painfully to the 
exclusion of all else. 

CHAPTER IX 

BIL!BIN WAS NOW at army headquarters in a 
diplomatic capacity, and though he wrote in 
French and used French jests and French id- 
ioms, he described the whole campaign with a 
fearless self-censure and self-derision genuine- 
ly Russian. Bilfbin wrote that the obligation of 
diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he 
was happy to have in Prince Andrew a reliable 
correspondent to whom he could pour out the 
bile he had accumulated at the sight of all that 
was being done in the army. The letter was 
old, having been written before the battle at 
Preussisch-Eylau. 

"Since the day of our brilliant success at Aus- 
terlitz," wrote Bilfbin, "as you know, my dear 
prince, I never leave headquarters. I have cer- 
tainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as 
well for me; what I have seen during these last 
three months is incredible. 

"I begin ab ovo. 'The enemy of the human 
race,' as you know, attacks the Prussians. The 
Prussians are our faithful allies who have only 
betrayed us three times in three years. We take 
up their cause, but it turns out that 'the enemy 
of the human race' pays no heed to our fine 
speeches and in his rude and savage way 
throws himself on the Prussians without giving 
them time to finish the parade they had begun, 
and in two twists of the hand he breaks them 
to smithereens and installs himself in the pal- 
ace at Potsdam. 

" 1 most ardently desire/ writes the King of 
Prussia to Bonaparte, 'that Your Majesty should 
be received and treated in my palace in a man- 
ner agreeable to yourself, and in so far as cir- 



BOOK FIVE 



209 



cumstances allowed, I have hastened to take 
all steps to that end. May I have succeeded!' 
The Prussian generals pride themselves on be- 
ing polite to the French and lay down their 
arms at the first demand. 

"The head of the garrison at Glogau, with 
ten thousand men, asks the King of Prussia 
what he is to do if he is summoned to surren- 
der. . . . All this is absolutely true. 

"In short, hoping to settle matters by taking 
up a warlike attitude, it turns out that we have 
landed ourselves in war, and what is more, in 
war on our own frontiers, with and for the King 
of Prussia. We have everything in perfect or- 
der, only one little thing is lacking, namely, a 
commander in chief. As it was considered that 
the Austerlitz success might have been more 
decisive had the commander in chief not been 
so young, all our octogenarians were reviewed, 
and of Prozor6vski and Kmenski the latter 
was preferred. The general comes to us, Suv6- 
rov-like, in a kibitka, 1 and is received with ac- 
clamations of joy and triumph. 

"On the 4th, the first courier arrives from 
Petersburg. The mails are taken to the field 
marshal's room, for he likes to do everything 
himself. I am called in to help sort the letters 
and take those meant for us. The field marshal 
looks on and waits for letters addressed to him. 
We search, but none are to be found. The field 
marshal grows impatient and sets to work him- 
self and finds letters from the Emperor to 
Count T., Prince V., and others. Then he bursts 
into one of his wild furies and rages at every- 
one and everything, seizes the letters, opens 
them, and reads those from the Emperor ad- 
dressed to others. 'Ah! So that's the way they 
treat me! No confidence in me! Ah, ordered to 
keep an eye on me! Very well then! Get along 
with you!' So he writes the famous order of the 
clay to General Bennigsen: 

" 'I am wounded and cannot ride and conse- 
quently cannot command the army. You have 
brought your army corps to Pultiisk, routed: 
here it is exposed, and without fuel or forage, 
so something must be done, and, as you your- 
self reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday, 
you must think of retreating to our frontier 
which do today.' 

" 'From all my riding,' he writes to the Em- 
peror, 'I have got a saddle sore which, coming 
after all my previous journeys, quite prevents 
my riding and commanding so vast an army, 
so I have passed on the command to the gen- 

1 An old-fashioned wooden cart with a covered 
top.-TR. 



eral next in seniority, Count Buxhowden, hav- 
ing sent him my whole staff and all that be- 
longs to it, advising him if there is a lack of 
bread, to move farther into the interior of 
Prussia, for only one day's ration of bread re- 
mains, and in some regiments none at all, as 
reported by the division commanders, Oster- 
mann and Sedmorckzki, and all that the peas- 
ants had has been eaten up. I myself will re- 
main in hospital at Ostrolenka till I recover. 
In regard to which I humbly submit my re- 
port, with the information that if the army re- 
mains in its present bivouac another fortnight 
there will not be a healthy man left in it by 
spring. 

" 'Grant leave to retire to his country seat to 
an old man who is already in any case dishon- 
ored by being unable to fulfill the great and 
glorious task for which he was chosen. I shall 
await your most gracious permission here in 
hospital, that I may not have to play the part 
of a secretary rather than commander in the 
army. My removal from the army does not pro- 
duce the slightest stir a blind man has left it. 
There are thousands such as I in Russia.' 

"The field marshal is angry with the Emper- 
or and he punishes us all, isn't it logical? 

"This is the first act. Those that follow are 
naturally increasingly interesting and enter- 
taining. After the field marshal's departure it 
appears that we are within sight of the enemy 
and must give battle. Buxhowden is command- 
er in chief by seniority, but General Bennig- 
sen does not quite see it; more particularly as 
it is he and his corps who are within sight of 
the enemy and he wishes to profit by the op- 
portunity to fight a battle 'on his own hand* as 
the Germans say. He does so. This is the battle 
of Pultiisk, which is considered a great victory 
but in my opinion was nothing of the kind. 
We civilians, as you know, have a very bad way 
of deciding whether a battle was won or lost. 
Those who retreat after a battle have lost it is 
what we say; and according to that it is we who 
lost the battle of Pultiisk. In short, we retreat 
after the battle but send a courier to Peters- 
burg with news of a victory, and General Ben- 
nigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg the 
post of commander in chief as a reward for his 
victory, does not give up the command of the 
army to General Buxhowden. During this in- 
terregnum we begin a very original and inter- 
esting series of maneuvers. Our aim is no 
longer, as it should be, to avoid or attack the 
enemy, but solely to avoid General Buxhowden 
who by right of seniority should be our chief. 



210 

So energetically do we pursue this aim that aft- 
er crossing an unfordable river we burn the 
bridges to separate ourselves from our enemy, 
who at the moment is not Bonaparte but Bux- 
howden. General Buxhowden was all but at- 
tacked and captured by a superior enemy force 
as a result of one of these maneuvers that en- 
abled us to escape him. Buxhowden pursues us 
we scuttle. He hardly crosses the river to our 
side before we recross to the other. At last our 
enemy, Buxhowden, catches us and attacks. 
Both generals are angry, and the result is a 
challenge on Buxhowden's part and an epilep- 
tic fit on Bennigsen's. But at the critical mo- 
ment the courier who carried the news of our 
victory at Pulttisk to Petersburg returns bring- 
ing our appointment as commander in chief, 
and our first foe, Buxhowden, is vanquished; 
we can now turn our thoughts to the second, 
Bonaparte. But as it turns out, just at that mo- 
ment a third enemy rises before usnamely 
the Orthodox Russian soldiers, loudly demand- 
ing bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, and whatnot! 
The stores are empty, the roads impassable. 
The Orthodox begin looting, and in a way of 
which our last campaign can give you no idea. 
Half the regiments form bands and scour the 
countryside and put everything to fire and 
sword. The inhabitants are totally ruined, the 
hospitals overflow with sick, and famine is 
everywhere. Twice the marauders even attack 
our headquarters, and the commander in chief 
has to ask for a battalion to disperse them. 
During one of these attacks they carried off my 
empty portmanteau and my dressing gown. 
The Emperor proposes to give all commanders 
of divisions the right to shoot marauders, but 
I much fear this will oblige one half the army 
to shoot the other." 

At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes 
only, but after a while, in spite of himself (al- 
though he knew how far it was safe to trust 
Bilibin), what he had read began to interest 
him more and more. When he had read thus 
far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it 
away. It was not what he had read that vexed 
him, but the fact that the life out there in which 
he had now no part could perturb him. He 
shut his eyes, rubbed his forehead as if to rid 
himself of all interest in what he had read, and 
listened to what was passing in the nursery. 
Suddenly he thought he heard a strange noise 
through the door. He was seized with alarm 
lest something should have happened to the 
child while he was reading the letter. He went 
on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it. 



WAR AND PEACE 



Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was 
hiding something from him with a scared look 
and that Princess Mary was no longer by the 
cot. 

"My dear," he heard what seemed to him her 
despairing whisper behind him. 

As often happens afterlongsleeplessnessand 
long anxiety, he was seized by an unreasoning 
panic it occurred to him that the child was 
dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to con- 
firm this terror. 

"All is over," he thought, and a cold sweat 
broke out on his forehead. He went to the cot 
in confusion, sure that he would find it empty 
and that the nurse had been hiding the dead 
baby. He drew the curtain aside and for some 
time his frightened, restless eyes could not find 
the baby. At last he saw him: the rosy boy had 
tossed about till he lay across the bed with his 
head lower than the pillow, and was smacking 
his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly. 

Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy 
like that, as if he had already lost him. He bent 
over him and, as his sister had taught him, 
tried with his lips whether the child was still 
feverish. The soft forehead was moist. Prince 
Andrew touched the head with his hand; even 
the hair was wet, so profusely had the child 
perspired. He was not dead, but evidently the 
crisis was over and he was convalescent. Prince 
Andrew longed to snatch up, to squeeze, to 
hold to his heart, this helpless little creature, 
but dared not do so. He stood over him, gazing 
at his head and at the little arms and legs 
which showed under the blanket. He heard a 
rustle behind him and a shadow appeared un- 
der the curtain of the cot. He did not look 
round, but still gazing at the infant's face lis- 
tened to his regular breathing. The dark shad- 
ow was Princess Mary, who had come up to the 
cot with noiseless steps, lifted the curtain, and 
dropped it again behind her. Prince Andrew 
recognized her without looking and held out 
his hand to her. She pressed it. 

"He has perspired," said Prince Andrew. 

"I was coming to tell you so." 

The child movedslightly in his sleep,smiled, 
and rubbed his forehead against the pillow. 

Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the 
dim shadow of the curtain her luminous eyes 
shone more brightly than usual from the tears 
of joy that were in them. She leaned over to 
her brother and kissed him, slightly catching 
the curtain of the cot. Each made the other a 
warning gesture and stood still in the dim 
light beneath the curtain as if not wishing to 



BOOK FIVE 



211 



leave that seclusion where they three were shut 
off from all the world. Prince Andrew was the 
first to move away, ruffling his hair against the 
muslin of the curtain. 

"Yes, this is the one thing left me now/' he 
said with a sigh. 

CHAPTER X 

SOON AFTER his admission to the Masonic Broth- 
erhood, Pierre went to the Kiev province, 
where he had the greatest number of serfs, tak- 
ing with him full directions which he had writ- 
ten down for his own guidance as to what he 
should do on his estates. 

When he reached Kiev he sent for all his 
stewards to the head office and explained to 
them his intentions and wishes. He told them 
that steps would be taken immediately to free 
his serfs and that till then they were not to be 
overburdened with labor, women while nurs- 
ing their babies were not to be sent to work, 
assistance was to be given to the serfs, punish- 
ments were to be admonitory and not corporal, 
and hospitals, asylums, and schools were to be 
established on all the estates. Some of the stew- 
ards (there were semiliterate foremen among 
them) listened with alarm, supposing these 
words to mean that the young count was dis- 
pleased with their management and embezzle- 
ment of money, some after their first fright 
were amused by Pierre's lisp and the new words 
they had not heard before, others simply en- 
joyed hearing how the master talked, while the 
cleverest among them, including the chief 
steward, understood from this speech how they 
could best handle the master for their own 
ends. 

The chief steward expressed great sympathy 
with Pierre's intentions, but remarked that be- 
sides these changes it would be necessary to go 
into the general state of affairs which was far 
from satisfactory. 

Despite Count Bezukhov's enormous wealth, 
since he had come into an income which was 
said to amount to five hundred thousand ru- 
bles a year, Pierre felt himself far poorer than 
when his father had made him an allowance 
of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim percep- 
tion of the following budget: 

About 80,000 went in payments on all the 
estates to the Land Bank, about 30,000 went 
for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow, the 
town house, and the allowance to the three 
princesses; about 15,000 was given in pensions 
and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 ali- 
mony was sent to the countess; about 70,000 



went for interest on debts. The building of a 
new church, previously begun, had cost about 
10,000 in each of the last two years, and he 
did not know how the rest, about 100,000 
rubles, was spent, and almost every year he was 
obliged to borrow. Besides this the chief stew- 
ard wrote every year telling him of fires and 
bad harvests, or of the necessity of rebuild- 
ing factories and workshops. So the first task 
Pierre had to face was one for which he had 
very little aptitude or inclination practical 
business. 

He discussed estate affairs every day with his 
chief steward. But he felt that this did not for- 
ward matters at all. He felt that these consulta- 
tions were detached from real affairs and did 
not link up with them or make them move. On 
the one hand, the chief steward put the state of 
things to him in the very worst light, pointing 
out the necessity of paying off the debts and 
undertaking new activities with serf labor, to 
which Pierre did not agree. On the other hand, 
Pierre demanded that steps should be taken to 
liberate the serfs, which the steward met by 
showing the necessity of first paying off the 
loans from the Land Bank, and theconsequent 
impossibility of a speedy emancipation. 

The steward did not say it was quite impos- 
sible, but suggested selling the forests in the 
province of Kostroma, the land lower down 
the river, and the Crimean estate, in order to 
make it possible: all of which operations ac- 
cording to him were connected with such com- 
plicated measuresthe removal of injunctions, 
petitions, permits, and so on that Pierre be- 
came quite bewildered and only replied: 

"Yes, yes, do so." 

Pierre had none of the practical persistence 
that would have enabled him to attend to the 
business himself and so he disliked it and only 
tried to pretend to the steward that he was at- 
tending to it. The steward for his part tried to 
pretend to the count that he considered these 
consultations very valuable for the proprietor 
and troublesome to himself. 

In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, 
and strangers hastened to make his acquaint- 
ance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer, 
the largest landowner of the province. Temp- 
tations to Pierre's greatest weakness the one 
to which he had confessed when admitted to 
the Lodge were so strong that he could not re- 
sist them. Again whole days, weeks, and months 
of his life passed in as great a rush and were as 
much occupied with evening parties, dinners, 
lunches, and balls, giving him no time for re- 



212 



WAR AND PEACE 



flection, as in Petersburg. Instead of the new 
life he had hoped to lead he still lived the old 
life, only in new surroundings. 

Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre 
realized that he did not fulfill the one which 
enjoined every Mason to set an example of 
moral life, and that of the seven virtues he 
lacked two morality and the love of death. He 
consoled himself with the thought that he ful- 
filled another of the precepts that of reform- 
ing the human race and had other virtues- 
love of his neighbor, and especially generosity. 

In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to 
Petersburg. On the way he intended to visit 
all his estates and see for himself how far his 
orders had been carried out and in what state 
were the serfs whom God had entrusted to his 
care and whom he intended to benefit. 

The chief steward, who considered the young 
count's attempts almost insane unprofitable 
to himself, to the count, and to the serfs made 
some concessions. Continuing to represent the 
liberation of the serfs as impracticable, he ar- 
ranged for the erection of large buildings- 
schools, hospitals, and asylums on all the es- 
tates before the master arrived. Everywhere 
preparations were made not for ceremonious 
welcomes (which he knew Pierre would not 
like), but for just such gratefully religious ones, 
with offerings of icons and the bread and salt 
of hospitality, as, according to his understand- 
ing of his master, would touch and delude him. 

The southern spring, the comfortable rapid 
traveling in a Vienna carriage, and the soli- 
tude of the road, all had a gladdening effect on 
Pierre. The estates he had not before visited 
were each more picturesque than the other; 
the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touch- 
ingly grateful for the benefits conferred on 
them. Everywhere were receptions, which 
though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a 
joyful feeling in the depth of his heart. In one 
place the peasants presented him with bread 
and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint 
Paul, asking permission, as a mark of their 
gratitude for the benefits he had conferred on 
them, to build a new chantry to the church at 
their own expense in honor of Peter and Paul, 
his patron saints. In another place the women 
with infants in arms met him to thank him for 
releasing them from hard work. On a third es- 
tate the priest, bearing a cross, came to meet 
him surrounded by children whom, by the 
count's generosity, he was instructing in read- 
ing, writing, and religion. On all his estates 
Pierre saw with his own eyes brick buildings 



erected or in course of erection, all on one 
plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, 
which were soon to be opened. Everywhere he 
saw the stewards' accounts, according to which 
the serfs' manorial labor had been diminished, 
and heard the touching thanks of deputations 
of serfs in their full-skirted blue coats. 

What Pierre did not know was that the place 
where they presented him with bread and salt 
and wished to build a chantry in honor of 
Peter and Paul was a market village where a 
fair was held on St. Peter's day, and that the 
richest peasants (who formed the deputation) 
had begun the chantry long before, but that 
nine tenths of the peasants in that village were 
in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not 
know that since the nursing mothers were no 
longer sent to work on his land, they did still 
harder work on their own land. He did not 
know that the priest who met him with the 
cross oppressed the peasants by his exactions, 
and that the pupils' parents wept at having to 
let him take their children and secured their 
release by heavy payments. He did not know 
that the brick buildings, built to plan, were 
being built by serfs whose manorial labor was 
thus increased, though lessened on paper. He 
did not know that where the steward had 
shown him in the accounts that the serfs' pay- 
ments had been diminished by a third, their 
obligatory manorial work had been increased 
by a half. And so Pierre was delighted with his 
visit to his estates and quite recovered the phil- 
anthropic mood in which he had left Peters- 
burg, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his 
"brother-instructor" as he called the Grand 
Master. 

"How easy it is, how little effort it needs, to 
do so much good," thought Pierre, "and how 
little attention we pay to itl" 

He was pleased at the gratitude he received, 
but felt abashed at receiving it. This gratitude 
reminded him of how much more he might do 
for these simple, kindly people. 

The chief steward, a very stupid but cun- 
ning man who saw perfectly through the nai've 
and intelligent count and played with him as 
with a toy, seeing the effect these prearranged 
receptions had on Pierre, pressed him still 
harder with proofs of the impossibility and 
above all the uselessness of freeing the serfs, 
who were quite happy as it was. 

Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the stew- 
ard that it would be difficult to imagine hap- 
pier people, and that God only knew what 
would happen to them when they were free, 



BOOK FIVE 



but he insisted, though reluctantly, on what he 
thought right. The steward promised to do all 
in his power to carry out the count's wishes, 
seeing clearly that not only would the count 
never be able to find out whether all measures 
had been taken for the sale of the land and 
forests and to release them from the Land Bank, 
but would probably never even inquire and 
would never know that the newly erected build- 
ings were standing empty and that the serfs 
continued to give in money and work all that 
other people's serfs gave that is to say, all that 
could be got out of them. 

CHAPTER XI 

RETURNING FROM his journey through South 
Russia in the happiest state of mind, Pierre 
carried out an intention he had long had of 
visiting his friend Bolk6nski, whom he had not 
seen for two years. 

Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part 
of the country among fields and forests of fir 
and birch, which were partly cut down. The 
house lay behind a newly dug pond filled with 
water to the brink and with banks still bare of 
grass. It was at the end of a village that stretched 
along the highroad in the midst of a young 
copse in which were a few fir trees. 

The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, 
outhouses, stables, a bathhouse, a lodge, and a 
large brick house with semicircular facade still 
in course of construction. Round the house 
was a garden newly laid out. The fences and 
gates were new and solid; two fire pumps and a 
water cart, painted green, stood in a shed; the 
paths were straight, the bridges were strong 
and had handrails. Everything bore an impress 
of tidiness and good management. Some do- 
mestic serfs Pierre met, in reply to inquiries as 
to where the prince lived, pointed out a small 
newly built lodge close to the pond. Ant6n, a 
man who had looked after Prince Andrew in 
his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage, 
said that the prince was at home, and showed 
him into a clean little anteroom. 

Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small 
though clean house after the brilliant surround- 
ings in which he had last met his friend in 
Petersburg. 

He quickly entered the small reception room 
with its sdll-un plastered wooden walls redo- 
lent of pine, and would have gone farther, but 
Ant6n ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a 
door. 

"Well, what is it?" came a sharp, unpleasant 
voice. 



"A visitor," answered Ant6n. 

"Ask him to wait," and the sound was heard 
of a chair being pushed back. 

Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and 
suddenly came face to face with Prince An- 
drew, who came out frowning and looking old. 
Pierre embraced him and lifting his spectacles 
kissed his friend on the cheek and looked at 
him closely. 

"Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad," 
said Prince Andrew. 

Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his 
friend with surprise. He was struck by the 
change in him. His words were kindly and 
there was a smile on his lips and face, but his 
eyes were dull and lifeless and in spite of his 
evident wish to do so he could not give them a 
joyous and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had 
grown thinner, paler, and more manly-looking, 
but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he 
got used to it were his inertia and a wrinkle on 
his brow indicating prolonged concentration 
on some one thought. 

As is usually the case with people meeting 
after a prolonged separation, it was long be- 
fore their conversation could settle on any- 
thing. They put questions and gave brief re- 
plies about things they knew ought to be talked 
over at length. At last the conversation gradu- 
ally settled on some of the topics at first lightly 
touched on: their past life, plans for the fu- 
ture, Pierre's journeys and occupations, the 
war, and so on. The preoccupation and de- 
spondency which Pierre had noticed in his 
friend's look was now still more clearly ex- 
pressed in the smile with which he listened to 
Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyful 
animation of the past or the future. It was as if 
Prince Andrew would have liked to sympathize 
with what Pierre was saying, but could not. 
The latter began to feel that it was in bad taste 
to speak of his enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes 
of happiness or goodness, in Prince Andrew's 
presence. He was ashamed to express his new 
Masonic views, which had been particularly re- 
vived and strengthened by his late tour. He 
checked himself, fearing to seem naive, yet he 
felt an irresistible desire to show his friend as 
soon as possible that he was now a quite dif- 
ferent, and better, Pierre than he had been in 
Petersburg. 

"I can't tell you how much I have lived 
through since then. I hardly know myself 
again." 

"Yes, we have altered much, very much, since 
then," said Prince Andrew. 



214 

"Well, and you? What are your plans?" 

"Plans!" repeated Prince Andrew ironically. 
"My plans?" he said, as if astonished at the 
word. "Well, you see, I'm building. I mean to 
settle here altogether next year " 

Pierre looked silently and searchingly into 
Prince Andrew's face, which had grown much 
older. 

"No, I meant to ask . . ." Pierre began, but 
Prince Andrew interrupted him. 

"But why talk of me? . . . Talk to me, yes, tell 
me about your travels and all you have been 
doing on your estates." 

Pierre began describing what he had done 
on his estates, trying as far as possible to con- 
ceal his own part in the improvements that 
had been made. Prince Andrew several times 
prompted Pierre's story of what he had been 
doing, as though it were all an old-time story, 
and he listened not only without interest but 
even as if ashamed of what Pierre was telling 
him. 

Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed 
in his friend's company and at last became si- 
lent. 

"I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said 
Prince Andrew, who evidently also felt de- 
pressed and constrained with his visitor, "I am 
only bivouacking here and have just come to 
look round. I am going back to my sister today. 
I will introduce you to her. But of course you 
know her already," he said, evidently trying to 
entertain a visitor with whom he now found 
nothing in common. "We will go after dinner. 
And would you now like to look round my 
place?" 

They went out and walked about till din- 
nertime, talking of the political news and com- 
mon acquaintances like people who do not 
know each other intimately. Prince Andrew 
spoke with some animation and interest only 
of the new homestead he was constructing and 
its buildings, but even here, while on the scaf- 
folding, in the midst of a talk explaining the 
future arrangements of the house, he inter- 
rupted himself: 

"However, this is not at all interesting. Let 
us have dinner, and then we'll set off." 

At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre's 
marriage. 

"I was very much surprised when I heard 
of it," said Prince Andrew. 

Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was 
mentioned, and said hurriedly: "I will tell you 
some time how it all happened. But you know 
it is all over, and forever." 



WAR AND PEACE 

" "Forever?" said Prince Andrew. "Nothing's 
forever." 

"But you know how it all ended, don't you? 
You heard of the duel?" 

"And so you had to go through that tool" 

"One thing I thank God for is that I did not 
kill that man," said Pierre. 

"Why so?" asked Prince Andrew. "To kill a 
vicious dog is a very good thing really." 

"No, to kill a man is bad wrong." 

"Why is it wrong?" urged Prince Andrew. 
"It is not given to man to know what is right 
and what is wrong. Men always did and always 
will err, and in nothing more than in what 
they consider right and wrong." 

"What does harm to another is wrong," said 
Pierre, feeling with pleasure that for the first 
time since his arrival Prince Andrew was roused, 
had begun to talk, and wanted to express what 
had brought him to his present state. 

"And who has told you what is bad for an- 
other man?" he asked. 

"Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre. "We all know 
what is bad for ourselves." 

"Yes, we know that, but the harm I am con- 
scious of in myself is something I cannot in- 
flict on others," said Prince Andrew, growing 
more and more animated and evidently wish- 
ing to express his new outlook to Pierre. He 
spoke in French. "I only know two very real evils 
in life: remorse and illness. The only good is 
the absence of those evils. To live for myself 
avoiding those two evils is my whole philoso- 
phy now." 

"And love of one's neighbor, and self-sacri- 
fice?" began Pierre. "No, I can't agree with 
you! To live only so as not to do evil and not 
to have to repent is not enough. I lived like 
that, I lived for myself and ruined my life. And 
only now when I am living, or at least trying" 
(Pierre's modesty made him correct himself) 
"to live for others, only now have I understood 
all the happiness of life. No, I shall not agree 
with you, and you do not really believe what 
you are saying." Prince Andrew looked silently 
at Pierre with an ironic smile. 

"When you sec ,my sister, Princess Mary, 
you'll get on with her," he said. "Perhaps you 
are right for yourself," he added after a short 
pause, "but everyone lives in his own way. You 
lived for yourself and say you nearly ruined 
your life and only found happiness when you 
began living for others. I experienced just the 
reverse. I lived for glory. And after all what is 
glory? The same love of others, a desire to do 
something for them, a desire for their approv- 



BOOK FIVE 



215 



al. So I lived for others, and not almost, but 
quite, ruined my life. And I have become calm- 
er since I began to live only for myself." 

"But what do you mean by living only for 
yourself?" asked Pierre, growing excited. 
"What about your son, your sister, and your 
father?" 

"But that's just the same as myself they are 
not others" explained Prince Andrew. "The 
others, one's neighbors, le prochain, as you and 
Princess Mary call it, are the chief source of 
all error and evil. Le prochain your Kiev 
peasants to whom you want to do good." 

And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, 
challenging expression. He evidently wished 
to draw him on. 

"You are joking," replied Pierre, growing 
more and more excited. "What error or evil 
can there be in my wishing to do good, and 
even doing a littlethough I did very little and 
did it very badly? What evil can there be in it 
if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like 
ourselves, were growing up and dying with no 
idea of God and truth beyond ceremonies and 
meaningless prayers and are now instructed in 
a comforting belief in future life, retribution, 
recompense, and consolation? What evil and 
error are there in it, if people were dying of 
disease without help while material assistance 
could so easily be rendered, and I supplied 
them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylum 
for the aged? And is it not a palpable, unques- 
tionable good if a peasant, or a woman with a 
baby, has no rest day or night and I give them 
rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurrying and 
lisping. "And I have done that though badly 
and to a small extent; but I have done some- 
thing toward it and you cannot persuade me 
that it was not a good action, and more than 
that, you can't make me believe that you do 
not think so yourself. And the main thing is," 
he continued, "that I know, and know for cer- 
tain, that the enjoyment of doing this good is 
the only sure happiness in life." 

"Yes, if you put it like that it's quite a dif- 
ferent matter," said Prince Andrew. "I build a 
house and lay out a garden, and you build 
hospitals. The one and the other may serve as 
a pastime. But what's right and what's good 
must be judged by one who knows all, but not 
by us. Well, you want an argument," he added, 
"come on then." 

They rose from the table and sat down in 
the entrance porch which served as a veranda. 

"Come, let's argue then," said Prince An- 
drew. "You talk of schools," he went on, crook- 



ing a finger, "education and so forth; that is, 
you want to raise him" (pointing to a peasant 
who passed by them taking off his cap) "from 
his animal condition and awaken in him spir- 
itual needs, while it seems to me that animal 
happiness is the only happiness possible, and 
that is just what you want to deprive him of. I 
envy him, but you want to make him what I 
am, without giving him my means. Then you 
say, 'lighten his toil.' But as I see it, physical 
labor is as essential to him, as much a condi- 
tion of his existence, as mental activity is to 
you or me. You can't help thinking. I go to bed 
after two in the morning, thoughts come and 
I can't sleep but toss about till dawn, because 
I think and can't help thinking, just as he 
can't help plowing and mowing; if he didn't, 
he would go to the drink shop or fall ill. Just 
as I could not stand his terrible physical labor 
but should die of it in a week, so he could not 
stand my physical idleness, but would grow 
fat and die. The third thing what else was it 
you talked about?" and Prince Andrew crooked 
a third finger. "Ah, yes, hospitals, medicine. 
He has a fit, he is dying, and you come and 
bleed him and patch him up. He will drag 
about as a cripple, a burden to everybody, for 
another ten years. It would be far easier and 
simpler for him to die. Others are being born 
and there are plenty of them as it is. It would 
be different if you grudged losing a laborer 
that's how I regard him but you want to cure 
him from love of him. And he does not want 
that. And besides, what a notion that medicine 
ever cured anyonel Killed them, yes!" said he, 
frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre. 

Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly 
and distinctly that it was evident he had re- 
flected on this subject more than once, and he 
spoke readily and rapidly like a man who has 
not talked for a long time. His glance became 
more animated as his conclusions became more 
hopeless. 

"Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" said Pierre. 
"I don't understand how one can live with 
such ideas. I had such moments myself not long 
ago, in Moscow and when traveling, but at 
such times I collapsed so that I don't live at all 
everything seems hateful to me . . . myself 
most of all. Then I don't eat, don't wash . . . 
and how is it with you? . . ." 

"Why not wash? That is not cleanly," said 
Prince Andrew; "on the contrary one must try 
to make one's life as pleasant as possible. I'm 
alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out 
my life as best I can without hurting others." 



2l6 



WAR AND PEACE 



"But with such ideas what motive have you 
for living? One would sit without moving, un- 
dertaking nothing " 

"Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be 
thankful to do nothing, but here on the one 
hand the local nobility have done me the hon- 
or to choose me to be their marshal; it was all 
I could do to get out of it. They could not un- 
derstand that I have not the necessary qualifi- 
cations for it the kind of good-natured, fussy 
shallowness necessary for the position. Then 
there's this house, which must be built in or- 
der to have a nook of one's own in which to be 
quiet. And now there's this recruiting." 

"Why aren't you serving in the army?" 

"After Austerlitz!" said Prince Andrew 
gloomily. "No, thank you very much! I have 
promised myself not to serve again in the ac- 
tive Russian army. And I won't not even if 
Bonaparte were here at Smolensk threatening 
Bald Hills even then I wouldn't serve in the 
Russian armyl Well, as I was saying," he con- 
tinued, recovering his composure, "now there's 
this recruiting. My father is chief in command 
of the Third District, and my only way of 
avoiding active service is to serve under him." 

"Then you are serving?" 

"I am." 

He paused a little while. 

"And why do you serve?" 

"Why, for this reason! My father is one of 
the most remarkable men of his time. But he 
is growing old, and though not exactly cruel 
he has too energetic a character. He is so ac- 
customed to unlimited power that he is terri- 
ble, and now he has this authority of a com- 
mander in chief of the recruiting, granted by 
the Emperor. If I had been two hours late a 
fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster's 
clerk at Yiikhnovna hanged," said Prince An- 
drew with a smile. "So I am serving because I 
alone have any influence with my father, and 
now and then can save him from actions which 
would torment him afterwards." 

"Well, there you see!" 

"Yes, but it is not as you imagine," Prince 
Andrew continued. "I did not, and do not, in 
the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk 
who had stolen some boots from the recruits; 
I should even have been very glad to see him 
hanged, but I was sorry for my father that 
again is for myself." 

Prince Andrew grew more and more ani- 
mated. His eyes glittered feverishly while he 
tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there 
was no desire to do good to his neighbor. 



"There now, you wish to liberate your serfs," 
he continued; "that is a very good thing, but 
not for you I don't suppose you ever had any- 
one flogged or sent to Siberia and still less for 
your serfs. If they are beaten, flogged, or sent 
to Siberia, I don't suppose they are any the 
worse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal 
life, and the stripes on their bodies heal, and 
they are happy as before. But it is a good thing 
for proprietors who perish morally, bring re- 
morse upon themselves, stifle this remorse and 
grow callous, as a result of being able to inflict 
punishments justly and unjustly. It is those peo- 
ple I pity, and for their sake I should like to 
liberate the serfs. You may not have seen, but I 
have seen, how good men brought up in those 
traditions of unlimited power, in time when 
they grow more irritable, become cruel and 
harsh, are conscious of it, but cannot restrain 
themselves and grow more and more misera- 
ble." 

Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre 
could not help thinking that these thoughts 
had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his 
father's case. 

He did not reply. 

"So that's what I'm sorry for human dignity, 
peace of mind, purity, arid not the serfs' backs 
and foreheads, which, beat and shave as you 
may, always remain the same backs and fore- 
heads." 

"No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never 
agree with you," said Pierre. 

CHAPTER XII 

IN THE EVENING Andrew and Pierre got into the 
open carriage and drove to Bald Hills. Prince 
Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence 
now and then with remarks which showed that 
he was in a good temper. 

Pointing to the fields, he spoke of the im- 
provements he was making in his husbandry. 

Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering 
in monosyllables and apparently immersed in 
his own thoughts. 

He was thinking that Prince Andrew was 
unhappy, had gone astray, did not see the true 
light, and that he, Pierre, ought to aid, en- 
lighten, and raise him. But as soon as he 
thought of what he should say, he felt that 
Prince Andrew with one word, one argument, 
would upset all his teaching, and he shrank 
from beginning, afraid of exposing to possible 
ridicule what to him was precious and sacred. 

"No, but why do you think so?" Pierre sud- 
denly began, lowering his head and looking 



BOOK FIVE 



217 



like a bull about to charge, "why do you think 
so? You should not think so." 

"Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew 
with surprise. 

"About life, about man's destiny. It can't be 
so. I myself thought like that, and do you know 
what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don't smile. 
Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect, 
as I thought it was: Freemasonry is the best ex- 
pression of the best, the eternal, aspects of hu- 
manity." 

And he began to explain Freemasonry as he 
understood it to Prince Andrew. He said that 
Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity 
freed from the bonds of State and Church, a 
teaching of equality, brotherhood, and love. 

"Only our holy brotherhood has the real 
meaning of life, all the rest is a dream," said 
Pierre. "Understand, my dear fellow, that out- 
side this union all is filled with deceit and 
falsehood and I agree with you that nothing is 
left for an intelligent and good man but to 
live out his life, like you, merely trying not to 
harm others. But make our fundamental con- 
victions your own, join our brotherhood, give 
yourself up to us, let yourself be guided, and 
you will at once feel yourself, as I have felt my- 
self, a part of that vast invisible chain the be- 
ginning of which is hidden in heaven," said 
Pierre. 

Prince Andrew, looking straight in front of 
him, listened in silence to Pierre's words. More 
than once, when the noise of the wheels pre- 
vented his catching wliat Pierre said, he asked 
him to repeat it, and by the peculiar glow that 
came into Prince Andrew's eyes and by his 
silence, Pierre saw that his words were not in 
vain and that Prince Andrew would not in- 
terrupt him or laugh at what he said. 

They reached a river that had overflowed its 
banks and which they had to cross by ferry. 
While the carriage and horses were beingplaced 
on it, they also stepped on the raft. 

Prince Andrew, leaning his arms on the raft 
railing, gazed silently at the flooding waters 
glittering in the setting sun. 

"Well, what do you think about it?" Pierre 
asked. "Why are you silent?" 

"What do I think about it? I am listening to 
you. It's all very well. . . . You say: join our 
brotherhood and we will show you the aim of 
life, the destiny of man, and the laws which gov- 
ern the world. But who are we? Men. How is it 
you know everything? Why do I alone not see 
what you see? You see a reign of goodness and 
truth on earth, but I don't see it." 



Pierre interrupted him. 

"Do you believe in a future life?" he asked. 

"A futurelife?" Prince Andrew repeated, but 
Pierre, giving him no time to reply, took the 
repetition for a denial, the more readily as he 
knew Prince Andrew's former atheistic con- 
victions. 

"You say you can't see a reign of goodness 
and truth on earth. Nor could I, and it can- 
not be seen if one looks on our life here as the 
end of everything. On earth f here on this earth" 
(Pierre pointed to the fields), "there is no 
truth, all is false and evil; but in the universe, 
in the whole universe, there is a kingdom of 
truth, and we who are now the children of 
earth are eternallychildren of the whole uni- 
verse. Don't I feel in my soul that I am part of 
this vast harmonious whole? Don't I feel that 
I form one link, one step, between the lower 
and higher beings, in this vast harmonious mul- 
titude of beings in whom the Deity the Su- 
preme Power if you prefer the term is mani- 
fest? If I see, clearly see, that ladder leading 
from plant to man, why should I suppose it 
breaks off at me and does not go farther and 
farther? I feel that I cannot vanish, since noth- 
ing vanishes in this world, but that I shall al- 
ways exist and always have existed. I feel that 
beyond me and above me there are spirits, and 
that in this world there is truth." 

"Yes, that is Herder's theory," said Prince 
Andrew, "but it is not that which can convince 
me, dear friend life and death are what con- 
vince. What convinces is when one sees a be- 
ing dear to one, bound up with one's own life, 
before whom one was to blame and had hoped 
to make it right" (Prince Andrew's voice trem- 
bled and he turned away), "and suddenly that 
being is seized with pain, suffers, and ceases to 
exist. . . . Why? It cannot be that there is no 

answer. And I believe there is That's what 

convinces, that is what has convinced me," said 
Prince Andrew. 

"Yes, yes, of course," said Pierre, "isn't that 
what I'm saying?" 

"No. All I say is that it is not argument that 
convinces me of the necessity of a future life, 
but this: when you go hand in hand with some- 
one and all at once that person vanishes there, 
into nowhere, and you yourself are left facing 
that abyss, and look in. And I have looked 
in. . . ." 

"Well, that's it then! You know that there is 
a there and there is a Someone? There is the 
future life. The Someone is God." 

Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage 



2l8 



WAR AND PEACE 



and horses had long since been taken off, onto 
the farther bank, and reharnessed. The sun 
had sunk half below the horizon and an eve- 
ning frost was starring the puddles near the fer- 
ry, but Pierre and Andrew, to the astonishment 
of the footmen, coachmen, and ferrymen, still 
stood on the raft and talked. 

"If there is a God and future life, there is 
truth and good, and man's highest happiness 
consists in striving to attain them. We must 
live, we must love, and we must believe that we 
live not only today on this scrap of earth, but 
have lived and shall live forever, there, in the 
Whole," said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky. 

Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing 
of theraft listening to Pierre, and he gazed with 
his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the sun 
gleaming on the blue waters. There was per- 
fect stillness. Pierre became silent. The raft had 
long since stopped and only the waves of the 
current beat softly against it below. Prince An- 
drew felt as if the sound of the waves kept up 
a refrain to Pierre's words, whispering: 

"It is true, believe it." 

He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, child- 
like, tender look at Pierre's face, flushed and 
rapturous, but yet shy before his superior 
friend. 

"Yes, if it only were sol "said Prince Andrew. 
"However, it is time to get on," he added, and, 
stepping off the raft, he looked up at the sky 
to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first 
time since Austerlitz saw that high, everlasting 
sky he had seen while lying on that battlefield; 
and something that had long been slumbering, 
something that was best within him, sudden- 
ly awoke, joyful and youthful, in his soul. It 
vanished as soon as he returned to the custom- 
ary conditions of his life, but he knew that this 
feeling which he did not know how to develop 
existed within him. His meeting with Pierre 
formed an epoch in Prince Andrew's life. 
Though outwardly he continued to live in the 
same old way, inwardly he began a new life. 

CHAPTER XIII 

IT WAS getting dusk when Prince Andrew and 
Pierre drove up to the front entrance of the 
house at Bald Hills. As they approached the 
house, Prince Andrew with a smile drew Pierre's 
attention to a commotion going on at the back 
porch. A woman, bent with age, with a wallet 
on her back, and a short, long-haired, young 
man in a black garment had rushed back to the 
gate on seeing the carriage driving up. Two 
women ran out after them, and all four, look- 



ing round at the carriage, ran in dismay up the 
steps of the back porch. 

"Those are Mary's 'God's folk,' " said Prince 
Andrew. "They have mistaken us for my father. 
This is the one matter in which she disobeys 
him. He orders these pilgrims to be driven 
away, but she receives them." 

"But what are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre. 

Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The 
servants came out to meet them, and he asked 
where the old prince was and whether he was 
expected back soon. 

The old prince had gone to the town and was 
expected back any minute. 

Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apart- 
ments, which were always kept in perfect order 
and readiness for him in his father's house; he 
himself went to the nursery. 

"Let us go and see my sister," he said to 
Pierre when he returned. "I have not found 
her yet, she is hiding now, sitting with her 
'God's folk.' It will serve her right, she will be 
confused, but you will see her 'God's folk.' It's 
really very curious." 

"What are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre. 

"Come, and you'll see for yourself." 

Princess Mary really was disconcerted and 
red patches came on her face when they went 
in. In her snug room, with lamps burning be- 
fore the icon stand, a young lad with a long 
nose and long hair, wearing a monk's cassock, 
sat on the sofa beside her, behind a samovar. 
Near them, in an armchair, sat a thin, shriveled, 
old woman, with a meek expression on her 
childlike face. 

"Andrew, why didn't you warn me?" said the 
princess, with mild reproach, as she stood be- 
fore her pilgrims like a hen before her chick- 
ens. 

"Charmde de vous voir. Je suis trs contente 
de vous voir" l she said to Pierre as he kissed 
her hand. She had known him as a child, and 
now his friendship with Andrew, his misfor- 
tune with his wife, and above all his kindly, 
simple face disposed her favorably toward him. 
She looked at him with her beautiful radiant 
eyes and seemed to say, "I like you very much, 
but please don't laugh at my people." After 
exchanging the first greetings, they sat down. 

"Ah, and Ivdnushka is here tool" said Prince 
Andrew, glancing with a smile at the young 
pilgrim. 

"Andrew!" said Princess Mary, imploringly. 
"// faut que vous sachiez que c'cst une 

1 "Delighted to see you. I am very glad to sec 
you." 



BOOK FIVE 



219 



fcmme" l said Prince Andrew to Pierre. 

"Andrew, au nom de Dieu!" a Princess Mary 
repeated. 

It was evident that Prince Andrew's ironical 
tone toward the pilgrims and Princess Mary's 
helpless attempts to protect them were their 
customary long-established relations on the 
matter. 

"Maw, ma bonne ami*/' said Prince Andrew, 
"vous devriez au contraire m'Stre reconnais- 
sante de ce que j'explique d Pierre votre inti- 
mite 1 avec ce jeune homme" * 

"Really?" said Pierre, gazing over his spec- 
tacles with curiosity and seriousness (forwhich 
Princess Mary was specially grateful to him) 
into Ivanushka's face, who, seeing that she was 
being spoken about, looked round at them all 
with crafty eyes. 

Princess Mary's embarrassment on her peo- 
ple's account was quite unnecessary. They were 
not in the least abashed. The old woman, low- 
ering her eyes but casting side glances at the 
newcomers, had turned her cup upside down 
and placed a nibbled bit of sugar beside it, and 
sat quietly in her armchair, though hoping to 
be offered another cup of tea. Ivdnushka, sip- 
ping out of her saucer, looked with sly woman- 
ish eyes from under her brows at the young 
men. 

"Where have you been? To Kiev?" Prince 
Andrew asked the old woman. 

"I have, good sir," she answered garrulously. 
"Just at Christmastime I was deemed worthy to 
partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament at 
the shrine of the saint. And now I'm from Kol- 
yzin, master, where a great and wonderful 
blessing has been revealed." 

"And was Ivanushka with you?" 

"I go by myself, benefactor," said Ivdnushka, 
trying to speak in a bass voice. "I only came 
across Pelage*ya in Yiikhnovo. . . ." 

Pelage*ya interrupted her companion; she 
evidently wished to tell what she had seen. 

"In Kolydzin, master, a wonderful blessing 
has been revealed." 

"What is it? Some new relics?" asked Prince 
Andrew. 

"Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary. 
"Don't tell him, Pelagya." 

"No . . . why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? 
I like him. He is kind, he is one of God's cho- 

1 "You must know that this is a woman." 

* "For heaven's sake." 

* "But, my dear, you ought on the contrary to be 
grateful to me for explaining to Pierre your inti- 
macy with this young man." 



sen, he's a benefactor, he once gave me ten ru- 
bles, I remember. When I was in Kiev, Crazy 
Cyril says to me (he's one of God's own and 
goes barefoot summer and winter), he says, 
'Why are you not going to the right place? Go 
to Kolyizin where a wonder-working icon of 
the Holy Mother of God has been revealed.' 
On hearing those words I said good-by to the 
holy folk and went." 

All were silent, only the pilgrim woman 
went on in measured tones, drawing in her 
breath. 

"So I come, master, and the people say tome: 
'A great blessing has been revealed, holy oil 
trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother, 
the Holy Virgin Mother of God.' . . ." 

"All right, all right, you can tell us after- 
wards," said Princess Mary, flushing. 

"Let me ask her," said Pierre. "Did you see 
it yourselves?" he inquired. 

"Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy. Such a 
brightness on the face like the light of heaven, 
and from the blessed Mother's cheek it drops 
and drops. . . ." 

"But, dear me, that must be a fraud!" said 
Pierre, naively, who had listened attentively to 
the pilgrim. 

"Oh, master, what are you say ing?" exclaimed 
the horrified Pelage* ya, turn ing to Princess Mary 
for support. 

"They impose on the people," he repeated. 

"Lord Jesus Christ!" exclaimed the pilgrim 
Woman, crossing herself. "Oh, don't speak so, 
master 1 There was a general who did not be- 
lieve, and said, 'The monks cheat,' and as soon 
as he'd said it he went blind. And he dreamed 
that the Holy Virgin Mother of the Kiev cata- 
combs came to him and said, 'Believe in meand 
I will make you whole.' So he begged: 'Take 
me to her, take me to her.' It's the real truth 
I'm telling you, I saw it myself. So he was 
brought, quite blind, straight to her, and he 
goes up to her and falls down and says, 'Make 
me whole,' says he, 'and I'll give thee what the 
Tsar bestowed on me.' I saw it myself, master, 
the star is fixed into the icon. Well, and what 
do you think? He received his sight! It's a sin 
to speak so. God will punish you," she said ad- 
monishingly, turning to Pierre. 

"How did the star get into the icon?" Pierre 
asked. 

"And was the Holy Mother promoted to the 
rank of general?" said Prince Andrew, with a 
smile. 

Pelagc*ya suddenly grew quite pale and 
clasped her hands. 



220 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Oh, master, master, what a sin! And you 
who have a son I" she began, her pallor sud- 
denly turning to a vivid red. "Master, what 
have you said? God forgive you!" And she 
crossed herself. "Lord forgive him! My dear, 
what does it mean? . . ." she asked, turning to 
Princess Mary. She got up and, almost crying, 
began to arrange her wallet. She evidently felt 
frightened and ashamed to have accepted char- 
ity in a house where such things could be said, 
and was at the same time sorry to have now to 
forgo the charity of this house. 

"Now, why need you do it?" said Princess 
Mary. "Why did you come to me? . . ." 

"Come, Pelagdya, I was joking," said Pierre. 
"Princesse, ma parole, je n'ai pas voulu Voffen- 
jer. 1 1 did not mean anything, I wasonlyjoking," 
he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface his 
offense. "It was all my fault, and Andrew was 
only joking." 

Pelag^ya stopped doubtfully, but in Pierre's 
face there was such a look of sincere penitence, 
and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at 
her and now at Pierre, that she was gradually 
reassured. 

CHAPTER XIV 

THE PILGRIM WOMAN was appeased and, being 
encouraged to talk, gave a long account of Fa- 
ther Amphilochus, who led so holy a life that 
his hands smelled of incense, and how on her 
last visit to Kiev some monks she knew let her 
have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, 
taking some dried bread with her, had spent 
two days in the catacombs with the saints. "I'd 
pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then go on 
to another. I'd sleep a bit and then again go 
and kiss the relics, and there was such peace all 
around, such blessedness, that one don't want 
to come out, even into the light of heaven 
again." 

Pierre listened to her attentively and serious- 
ly. Prince Andrew went out of the room, and 
then, leaving "God's folk" to finish their tea, 
Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing 
room. 

"You are very kind," she said to him. 

"Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feel- 
ings. I understand them so well and have the 
greatest respect for them." 

Princess Mary looked at him silently and 
smiled affectionately. 

"I have known you a long time, you see, and 
am as fond of you as of a brother," she said. 

1 "Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend 
her/' 



"How do you find Andrew?" she added hur- 
riedly, not giving him time to reply to her af- 
fectionate words. "I am very anxious about 
him. His health was better in the winter, but 
last spring his wound reopened and the doctor 
said he ought to go away for a cure. And I am 
also very much afraid for him spiritually. He 
has not a character like us women who, when 
we suffer, can weep away our sorrows. He keeps 
it all within him. Today he is cheerful and in 
good spirits, but that is the effect of your visit 
he is not often like that. If you could per- 
suade him to go abroad. He needs activity, and 
this quiet regular life is very bad for him. Oth- 
ers don't notice it, but I see it." 

Toward ten o'clock the menservants rushed 
to the front door, hearing the bells of the old 
prince's carriage approaching. Prince Andrew 
and Pierre also went out into the porch. 

"Who's that?" asked the old prince, notic- 
ing Pierre as he got out of the carriage. 

"Ah! Very glad! Kiss me," he said, having 
learned who the young stranger was. 

The old prince was in a good temper and 
very gracious to Pierre. 

Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back 
to his father's study, found him disputing hot- 
ly with his visitor. Pierre was maintaining that 
a time would come when there would be no 
more wars. The old prince disputed it chaffing- 
ly, but without getting angry. 

"Drain the blood from men's veins and put 
in water instead, then there will be no more 
war! Old women's nonsense old women's 
nonsense!" he repeated, but still he patted 
Pierre affectionately on the shoulder, and then 
went up to the table where Prince Andrew, ev- 
idently not wishing to join in the conversation, 
was looking over the papers his father had 
brought from town. The old prince went up to 
him and began to talk business. 

"The marshal, a Count Rost6v, hasn't sent 
half his contingent. He came to town and 
wanted to invite me to dinner I gave him a 
pretty dinner! . . . And there, look at this. . . . 
Well, my boy," the old prince went on, address- 
ing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder. 
"A fine fellow your friend I like him! He 
stirs me up. Another says clever things and one 
doesn't care to listen, but this one talks rub- 
bish yet stirs an old fellow up. Well, go! Get 
along! Perhaps I'll come and sit with you at 
supper. We'll have another dispute. Make 
friends with my little fool, Princess Mary," he 
shouted after Pierre, through the door. 

Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did 



BOOK FIVE 



Pierre fully realize the strength and charm of 
his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charm 
was not expressed so much in his relations with 
him as with all his family and with the house- 
hold. With the stern old prince and the gen- 
tle, timid Princess Mary, though he had scarce- 
ly known them, Pierre at once felt like an old 
friend. They were all fond of him already. Not 
only Princess Mary, who had been won by his 
gentleness with the pilgrims, gave him her most 
radiant looks, but even the one-year-old "Prince 
Nicholas" (as his grandfather called him) 
smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in his 
arms, and Michael Ivdnovich and Mademoi- 
selle Bourienne looked at him with pleasant 
smiles when he talked to the old prince. 

The old prince came in to supper; this was 
evidently on Pierre's account. And during the 
two days of the young man's visit he was ex- 
tremely kind to him and told him to visit them 
again. 

When Pierre had gone and the members of 
the household met together, they began to ex- 
prtss their opinions of him as people always 
do after a new acquaintance has left, but as 
seldom happens, no one said anything but 
what was good of him. 

CHAPTER XV 

WHEN RETURNING from his leave, Rostov felt, 
for the first time, how close was the bond that 
united him to Denfsovand the whole regiment. 

On approaching it, Rost6v felt as he had 
done when approaching his home in Moscow. 
When he saw the first hussar with the unbut- 
toned uniform of his regiment, when he rec- 
ognized red-haired Dem^ntyev and saw the 
picket ropes of the roan horses, when Lavru- 
shka gleefully shouted to his master, "The 
count has cornel" and Denfsov, who had been 
asleep on his bed, ran all disheveled out of the 
mud hut to embrace him, and the officers col- 
lected round to greet the new arrival, Rostov 
experienced the same feeling as when his moth- 
er, his father, and his sister had embraced him, 
and tears of joy choked him so that he could 
not speak. The regiment was also a home, and 
as unalterably dear and precious as his parents' 
house. 

When he had reported himself to the com- 
mander of the regiment and had been reas- 
signed to his former squadron, had been on 
duty and had gone out foraging, when he had 
again entered into all the little interests of the 
regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty 
and bound in one narrow, unchanging frame, 



he experienced the same sense of peace, of mor- 
al support, and the same senseof being at home 
here in his own place, as he had felt under the 
parental roof. But here was none of all that 
turmoil of the world at large, where he did not 
know his right place and took mistaken deci- 
sions; here was no ScSnya with whom he ought, 
or ought not, to have an explanation; here was 
no possibility of going there or not going there; 
here there were not twenty- four hours in the 
day which could be spent in such a variety of 
ways; there was not that innumerable crowd of 
people of whom not one was nearer to him or 
farther from him than another; there were 
none of those uncertain and undefined money 
relations with his father, and nothing to recall 
that terrible loss to D61okhov. Here, in the reg- 
iment, all was clear and simple. The whole 
world was divided into two unequal parts: one, 
our Pdvlograd regiment; the other, all the rest. 
And the rest was no concern of his. In the regi- 
ment, everything was definite: who was lieu- 
tenant, who captain, who was a good fellow, 
who a bad one, and most of all, who was a com- 
rade. The canteenkeeper gave one credit, one's 
pay came every four months, there was nothing 
to think out or decide, you had only to do noth- 
ing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd 
regiment and, when given an order, to do what 
was clearly, distinctly, and definitely ordered 
and all would be well. 

Having once more entered into the definite 
conditions of this regimental life, Rost6v felt 
the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying 
down to rest. Life in the regiment, during this 
campaign, was all the pleasanter for him, be- 
cause, after his loss to D61okhov (for which, in 
spite of all his family's efforts to console him, 
he could not forgive himself), he had made up 
his mind to atone for his fault by serving, not 
as he had done before, but really well, and by 
being a perfectly first-rate comrade and officer 
in a word, a splendid man altogether, a thing 
which seemed so difficult out in the world, but 
so possible in the regiment. 

After his losses, he had determined to pay 
back his debt to his parents in five years. He re- 
ceived ten thousand rubles a year, but now re- 
solved to take only two thousand and leave the 
rest to repay the debt to his parents. 

Our army, after repeated retreats and ad- 
vances and battles at Pultiisk and Preussisch- 
Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It 
was awaiting the Emperor's arrival and the be- 
ginning of a new campaign. 

The Pdvlograd regiment, belonging to that 



22* 



WAR AND PEACE 



part of the army which had served in the 1805 
campaign, had been recruiting up to strength 
in Russia, and arrived too late to take part in 
the first actions of the campaign. It had been 
neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and, 
when it joined the army in the field in the sec- 
ond half of the campaign, was attached to Pld- 
tov's division. 

Pldtov's division was acting independently 
of the main army. Several times parts of the 
Pdvlograd regiment had exchanged shots with 
the enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had 
even captured Marshal Oudinot's carriages. In 
April the Pdvlograds were stationed immova- 
bly for some weeks near a totally ruined and 
deserted German village. 

A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, 
the ice on the river broke, and the roads be- 
came impassable. For days neither provisions 
for the men nor fodder for the horses had been 
issued. As no transports could arrive, the men 
dispersed about the abandoned and deserted 
villages, searching for potatoes, but found few 
even of these. 

Everything had been eaten up and the in- 
habitants had all fled if any remained, they 
were worse than beggars and nothing more 
could be taken from them; even the soldiers, 
usually pitiless enough, instead of taking any- 
thing from them, often gave them the last of 
their rations. 

The Pdvlograd regiment had had only two 
men wounded in action, but had lost nearly half 
its men from hunger and sickness. In the hos- 
pitals, death was so certain that soldiers suffer- 
ing from fever, or the swelling that came from 
bad food, preferred to remain on duty, and 
hardly able to drag their legs went to the front 
rather than to the hospitals. When spring came 
on, the soldiers found a plant just showing out 
of the ground that looked like asparagus, which, 
for some. reason, they called "Mdshka's sweet 
root." It was very bitter, but they wandered 
about the fields seeking it and dug it out with 
their sabers and ate it, though they were or- 
dered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant. 
That spring a new disease broke out among the 
soldiers, a swelling of the arms, legs, and face, 
which the doctors attributed to eating this root. 
But in spite of all this, the soldiers of Denisov's 
squadron fed chiefly on "Mdshka's sweet root," 
because it was the second week that the last of 
the biscuits were being doled out at the rate of 
half a pound a man and the last potatoes re- 
ceived had sprouted and frozen. 

The horses also had been fed for a fortnight 



on straw from the thatched roofs and had be- 
come terribly thin, though still covered with 
tufts of felty winter hair. 

Despite this destitution, the soldiers and of- 
ficers went on living just as usual. Despite their 
pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, the 
hussars formed line for roll call, kept things in 
order, groomed their horses, polished their 
arms, brought in straw from the thatched roofs 
in place of fodder, and sat down to dine round 
the caldrons from which they rose up hungry, 
joking about their nasty food and their hunger. 
As usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, 
steamed themselves before them naked; 
smoked, picked out and baked sprouting rot- 
ten potatoes, told and listened to stories of Po- 
tdmkin's and Suv6rov's campaigns, or to leg- 
ends of Alesha the Sly, or the priest's laborer 
Mik61ka. 

The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes 
in the roofless, half-ruined houses. The seniors 
tried to collect straw and potatoes and, in gen- 
eral, food for the men. The younger ones oc- 
cupied themselves as before, some playing cards 
(there was plenty of money, though there was 
no food), some with more innocent games, such 
as quoits and skittles. The general trend of 
the campaign was rarely spoken of, partly be- 
cause nothing certain was known about it, 
partly because there was a vague feeling that 
in the main it was going badly. 

Rost6v lived, as before, with Denfsov, and 
since their furlough they had become more 
friendly than ever. Denisov never spoke of Ros- 
tov's family, but by the tender friendship his 
commander showed him, Rost6v felt that the 
elder hussar's luckless love for Natdsha played 
a part in strengthening their friendship. Den- 
fsov evidently tried to expose Rost6v to dan- 
ger as seldom as possible, and after an action 
greeted his safe return with evident joy. On 
one of his foraging expeditions, in a deserted 
and ruined village to which he had come in 
search of provisions, Rost6v found a family 
consisting of an old Pole and his daughter with 
an infant in arms. They were half clad, hungry, 
too weak to get away on foot and had no means 
of obtaining a conveyance. Rost6v brought 
them to his quarters, placed them in his own 
lodging, and kept them for some weeks while 
the old man was recovering. One of his com- 
rades, talking of women, began chaffing Ros- 
t6v, saying that he was more wily than any of 
them and that it would not be a bad thing if 
he introduced to them the pretty Polish girl he 
had saved. Rost6v took the joke as an insult, 



BOOK FIVE 



223 



flared up, and said such unpleasant things to 
the officer that it was all Denfsov could do to 
prevent aduel.Whentheofficerhad goneaway, 
Denfsov, who did not himself know what Ros- 
t6v's relations with the Polish girl might be, be- 
gan to upbraid him for his quickness of tem- 
per, and Rostov replied: 

"Say what you like. . . . She is like a sister to 
me, and I can't tell you how it offended me 
. . . because . . . well, for that reason. . . ." 

Denisov patted him on the shoulder and be- 
gan rapidly pacing the room without looking 
at Rostov, as was his way at moments of deep 
feeling. 

"Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostovs are!" 
he muttered, and Rost6v noticed tears in his 
eyes. 

CHAPTER XVI 

IN APRIL the troops were enlivened by news 
of the Emperor's arrival, but Rost6v had no 
chance of being present at the review he held 
at Bartenstein, as the Pavlograds were at the 
outposts far beyond that place. 

They were bivouacking. Denisov and Ros- 
t6v were living in an earth hut, dug out for 
them by the soldiers and roofed with branches 
and turf. The hut was made in the following 
manner, which had then come into vogue. A 
trench was dug three and a half feet wide, four 
feet eight inches deep, and eight feet long. At 
one end of the trench, steps were cut out and 
these formed the entrance and vestibule. The 
trench itself was the room, in which the lucky 
ones, such as the squadron commander, had a 
board, lying on piles at the end opposite the 
entrance, to serve as a table. On each side of 
the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth 
of about two and a half feet, and this did duty 
for bedsteads and couches. The roof was so 
constructed that one could stand up in the mid- 
dle of the trench and could even sit up on the 
beds if one drew close to the table. Denfsov, 
who was living luxuriously because the sol- 
diers of his squadron liked him, had also a 
board in the roof at the farther end, with a 
piece of (broken but mended) glass in it for a 
window. When it was very cold, embers from 
the soldiers' campfire were placed on a bent 
sheet of iron on the steps in the "reception 
room" as Denfsov called that part of the hut 
and it was then so warm that the officers, of 
whom there were always some with Denfsov 
and Rost6v, sat in their shirt sleeves. 

In April, Rost6v was on orderly duty. One 
morning, between seven and eight, returning 



after a sleepless night, he sent for embers, 
changed his rain-soaked underclothes, said his 
prayers, drank tea, got warm, then tidied up 
the things on the table and in his own corner, 
and, his face glowing from exposure to the 
wind and with nothing on but his shirt, lay 
down on his back, putting his arms under his 
head. He was pleasantly considering the prob- 
ability of being promoted in a few days for his 
last reconnoitering expedition, and was await- 
ing Denisov, who had gone out somewhere and 
with whom he wanted a talk. 

Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vi- 
brating voice behind the hut, evidently much 
excited. Rost6v moved to the window to see 
whom he was speaking to, and saw the quarter- 
master, Topche'enko. 

"I ordered you not to let them eat that Mash- 
ka woot stuff!" Denisov was shouting. "And I 
saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought 
some fwom the fields." 

"I have given the order again and again, 
your honor, but they don't obey, "answered the 
quartermaster. 

Rost6v lay down again on his bed and 
thought complacently: "Let him fuss and bus- 
tle now, my job's done and I'm lying down- 
capitally!" He could hear that Lavrushka 
that sly, bold orderly of Denisov's was talking, 
as well as the quartermaster. Lavrushka was 
saying something about loaded wagons, bis- 
cuits, and oxen he had seen when he had gone 
out for provisions. 

Then Denisov's voice was heard shouting 
farther and farther away. "Saddle! Second pla- 
toon!" 

"Where are they off to now?" thought Ros- 
t6v. 

Five minutes later, Denfsov came into the 
hut, climbed with muddy boots on the bed, 
lit his pipe, furiously scattered his things 
about, took his leaded whip, buckled on his 
saber, and went out again. In answer to Ros- 
t6v's inquiry where he was going, he answered 
vaguely and crossly that he had some business. 

"Let God and our gweat monarch judge me 
afterwards!" said Denfsov going out, and Ros- 
t6v heard the hoofs of several horses splashing 
through the mud. He did not % even trouble to 
find out where Denfsov had gone. Having got 
warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not 
leave the hut till toward evening. Denfsov had 
not yet returned. The weather had cleared up, 
and near the next hut two officers and a cadet 
were playing svdyka, laughing as they threw 
their missiles which buried themselves in the 



224 



WAR AND PEACE 



soft mud. Rostdv joined them. In the middle 
of the game, the officers saw some wagons ap- 
proaching with fifteen hussars on their skinny 
horses behind them. The wagons escorted by 
the hussars drew up to the picket ropes and a 
crowd of hussars surrounded them. 

"There now, Denfsov has been worrying," 
said Rost6v, "and here are the provisions." 

"So they are!" said the officers. "Won't the 
soldiers be glad!" 

A little behind the hussars came Denfsov, 
accompanied by two infantry officers with 
whom he was talking. 

Rost6v went to meet them. 

"I warn you, Captain," one of the officers, a 
short thin man, evidently very angry, was say- 
ing. 

"Haven't I told you I won't give them up?" 
replied Denfsov. 

"You will answer for it, Captain. It is mu- 
tinyseizing the transport of one's own army. 
Our men have had nothing to eat for two days." 

"And mine have had nothing for two weeks," 
said Denfsov. 

"It is robbery! You'll answer for it, sir!" said 
the infantry officer, raising his voice. 

"Now, what are you pestewing me for?" 
cried Denfsov, suddenly losing his temper. "I 
shall answer for it and not you, and you'd bet- 
ter not buzz about here till you get hurt. Be off I 
Go!" he shouted at the officers. 

"Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, 
undaunted and not riding away. "If you are 
determined to rob, I'll . . ." 

"Go to the devil! quick ma'ch, while you're 
safe and sound!" and Denfsov turned his horse 
on the officer. 

"Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, 
threateningly, and turning his horse he trotted 
away, jolting in his saddle. 

"A dog astwide a fence! A weal dog astwide 
a fence!" shouted Denfsov after him (the most 
insulting expression a cavalryman can address 
to a mounted infantryman) and riding up to 
Rost6v, he burst out laughing. 

"I've taken twansports from the infantwy by 
force!" he said. "After all, can't let our men 
starve." 

The wagons that had reached the hussars 
had been consigned to an infantry regiment, 
but learning from La vnishka that the transport 
was unescorted, Denfsov with his hussars had 
seized it by force. The soldiers had biscuits 
dealt out to them freely, and they even shared 
them with the other squadrons. 

The next day the regimental commander 



sent for Denfsov, and holding his fingers spread 
out before his eyes said: 

"This is howl look at thisaffair: I know noth- 
ing about it and won't begin proceedings, but 
I advise you to ride over to the staff and settle 
the business there in the commissariat depart- 
ment and if possible sign a receipt forsuch and 
such stores received. If not, as the demand was 
booked against an infantry regiment, there will 
be a row and the affair may end badly." 

From the regimental commander's, Denfsov 
rode straight to the staff with a sincere desire 
to act on this advice. In the evening he came 
back to his dugout in a state such as Rostov 
had never yet seen him in. Denfsov could not 
speak and gasped for breath. When Rostov 
asked what was the matter, he only uttered 
some incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse, 
feeble voice. 

Alarmed at Denfsov's condition, Rost6v sug- 
gested that he should undress, drink some wa- 
ter, and send for the doctor. 

"Twy me for wobbewy ... oh! Some more 
water . . . Let them twy me, but I'll always 
thwash scoundwels . . . and I'll tell the Empe- 
wo' . . . Ice . . ." he muttered. 

The regimental doctor, when he came, said 
it was absolutely necessary to bleed Denfsov. A 
deep saucer of black blood was taken from his 
hairy arm and only then was he able to relate 
what had happened to him. 

"I get there," began Denfsov. " 'Now then, 
where's your chief's quarters?' They were point- 
ed out. 'Please to wait.' 'I've widden twenty 
miles and have duties to attend to and no 
time to wait. Announce me/ Vewy well, so 
out comes their head chief also took it into his 
head to lecture me: 'It's wobbewy!' 'Wobbe- 
wy,' I say, 'is not done by a man who seizes pwo- 
visions to feed his soldiers, but by him who 
takes them to fill his own pockets!' 'Will you 
please be silent?' 'Vewy good!' Then he says: 
'Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner, 
but your affair will be passed on to headquar- 
ters.' I go to the commissioner. I enter, and at 
the table . . . who do you think? No, but wait a 
bit! . . . Who is it that's starving us?" shouted 
Denfsov, hitting the table with the fist of his 
newly bled arm so violently that the table near- 
ly broke down and the tumblers on it jumped 
about. "Telydnin! 'What? So it's you who's 
starving us to death! Is it? Take this and this!' 
and I hit him so pat, stwaight on his snout . . . 
'Ah, what a . . .what . . . 1'and I sta'ted f washing 
him . . .Well, I've had a bit of fun I can tell you!" 
cried Denfsov, gleeful and yet angry, his white 



BOOK FIVE 



225 



teeth showing under his black mustache. 
"I'd have killed him if they hadn't taken him 
awayl" 

"But what are you shouting for? Calm your- 
self," said Rost6v. "You've set your arm bleed- 
ing afresh. Wait, we must tie it up again." 

Denisov was bandaged up again and put to 
bed. Next day he woke calm and cheerful. 

But at noon the adjutant of the regiment 
came into Rost6v's and Denfsov's dugout with 
a grave and serious face and regretfully showed 
them a paper addressed to Major Denfsov from 
the regimental commander in which inquiries 
were made about yesterday's occurrence. The 
adjutant told them that the affair was likely 
to take a very bad turn: that a court-martial 
had been appointed, and that in view of the 
severity with which marauding and insubordi- 
nation were now regarded, degradation to the 
ranks would be the best that could be hoped 
for. 

The case, as represented by the offended par- 
ties, was that, after seizing the transports, Ma- 
jor Denisov, being drunk, went to the chief 
quartermaster and without any provocation 
called him a thief, threatened to strike him, 
and on being led out had rushed into the office 
and given two officials a thrashing, and dislo- 
cated the arm of one of them. 

In answer to Rost6v's renewed questions, 
Denfsov said, laughing, that he thought he re- 
membered that some other fellow had got 
mixed up in it, but that it was all nonsense and 
rubbish, and he did not in the least fear any 
kind of trial, and that if those scoundrels dared 
attack him he would give them an answer that 
they would not easily forget. 

Denfsov spoke contemptuously of the whole 
matter, but Rost6v knew him too well not to 
detect that (while hiding it from others) at 
heart he feared a court-martial and was wor- 
ried over the affair, which was evidently tak- 
ing a bad turn. Every day, letters of inquiry 
and notices from the court arrived, and on the 
first of May, Denfsov was ordered to hand the 
squadron over to the next in seniority and ap- 
pear before the staff of his division to explain 
his violence at the commissariat office. On the 
previous day Pldtov reconnoitered with two 
Cossack regiments and two squadrons of hus- 
sars. Denisov, as was his wont, rode out in front 
of the outposts, parading his courage. A bullet 
fired by a French sharpshooter hit him in the 
fleshy part of his leg. Perhaps at another time 
Denfsov would not have left the regiment for 
so slight a wound, but now he took advantage 



of it to excuse himself from appearing at the 
staff and went into hospital. 

CHAPTER XVII 

IN JUNE the battle of Friedland was fought, in 
which the Pavlograds did not take part, and 
after that an armistice was proclaimed. Rost6v, 
who felt his friend's absence very much, having 
no news of him since he left and feeling very 
anxious about his wound and the progress of 
his affairs, took advantage of the armistice to 
get leave to visit Denfsov in hospital. 

The hospital was in a small Prussian town 
that had been twice devastated by Russian and 
French troops. Because it was summer, when it 
is so beautiful out in the fields, the little town 
presented a particularly dismal appearance 
with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets, 
tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken 
soldiers wandering about. 

The hospital was in a brick building with 
some of the window frames and panes broken 
and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of 
a wooden fence that had been pulled to pieces. 
Several bandaged soldiers, with pale swollen 
faces, were sitting or walking about in the sun- 
shine in the yard. 

Directly Rost6v entered the door he was en- 
veloped by a smell of putrefaction and hospital 
air. On the stairs he met a Russian army doc- 
tor smoking a cigar. The doctor was followed 
by a Russian assistant. 

"I can't tear myself to pieces," the doctor was 
saying. "Come to Makar Alexe*evich in the eve- 
ning. I shall be there." 

The assistant asked some further questions. 

"Oh, do the best you can! Isn't it all the 
same?" The doctor noticed Rost6v coming up- 
stairs. 

"What do you want, sir?" said the doctor. 
"What do you want? The bullets having spared 
you, do you want to try typhus? This is a pest- 
house, sir." 

"How so?" asked Rost6v. 

"Typhus, sir. It's death to go in. Only we 
two, Mak^ev and I" (he pointed to the assist- 
ant), "keep on here. Some five of us doctors 
have died in this place. . . . When a new one 
comes he is done for in a week," said the doc- 
tor with evident satisfaction. "Prussian doctors 
have been invited here, but our allies don't 
like it at all." 

Rost6v explained that he wanted to see Ma- 
jor Denfsov of the hussars, who was wounded. 

"I don't know. I can't tell you, sir. Only 
think] I am alone in charge of three hospitals 



226 



WAR AND PEACE 



with more than four hundred patients! It's 
well that the charitable Prussian ladies send us 
two pounds of coffee and some lint each month 
or we should be lost!" he laughed. "Four hun- 
dred, sir, and they're always sending me fresh 
ones. There are four hundred? Eh?" he asked, 
turning to the assistant. 

The assistant looked fagged out. He was evi- 
dently vexed and impatient for the talkative 
doctor to go. 

"Major Denisov," Rost6v said again. "He 
was wounded at Molliten." 

"Dead, I fancy. Eh, Mak^ev?" queried the 
doctor, in a tone of indifference. 

The assistant, however, did not confirm the 
doctor's words. 

"Is he tall and with reddish hair?" asked the 
doctor. 

Rost6v described Denisov's appearance. 

"There was one like that," said the doctor, 
as if pleased. "That one is dead, I fancy. How- 
ever, I'll look up our list. We had a list. Have 
you got it, Makev?" 

"Makir Alextfevich has the list," answered 
the assistant. "But if you'll step into the officers' 
wards you'll see for yourself," he added, turn- 
ing to Rostov. 

"Ah, you'd better not go, sir," said the doc- 
tor, "or you may have to stay here yourself." 

But Rost6v bowed himself away from the 
doctor and asked the assistant to show him the 
way. 

"Only don't blame me!" the doctor shouted 
up after him. 

Rost6v and the assistant went into the dark 
corridor. The smell was so strong there that 
Rost6v held his nose and had to pause and 
collect his strength before he could go on. A 
door opened to the right, and an emaciated 
sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in un- 
derclothing, limped out and, leaning against 
the doorpost, looked with glittering envious 
eyes at those who were passing. Glancing in at 
the door,Rost6v saw that the sick and wounded 
were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats. 

"May I go in and look?" 

"What is there to see?" said the assistant. 

But, just because the assistant evidently did 
not want him to go in, Rost6v entered the sol- 
diers' ward. The foul air, to which he had al- 
ready begun to get used in the corridor, was 
still stronger here. It was a little different, 
more pungent, and one felt that this was where 
it originated. 

In the long room, brightly lit up by the sun 
through the large windows, the sick and wound- 



ed lay in two rows with their heads to the walls, 
and leaving a passage in the middle. Most of 
them were unconscious and paid no attention 
to the newcomers. Those who were conscious 
raised themselves or lifted their thin yellow 
faces, and all looked intently at Rost6v with 
the same expression of hope, of relief, re- 
proach, and envy of another's health. Rost6v 
went to the middle of the room and looking 
through the open doors into the two adjoining 
rooms saw the same thing there. He stood still, 
looking silently around. He had not at all ex- 
pected such a sight. Just before him, almost 
across the middle of the passage on the bare 
floor, lay a sick man, probably a Cossack to 
judge by the cut of his hair. The man lay on 
his back, his huge arms and legs outstretched. 
His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back 
so that only the whites were seen, and on his 
bare legs and arms which were still red, the 
veins stood out like cords. He was knocking 
the back of his head against the floor, hoarsely 
uttering some word which he kept repeating. 
Rost6v listened and made out the word. It 
was "drink, drink, a drinkl" Rost6v glanced 
round, looking for someone who would put 
this man back in his place and bring him wa- 
ter. 

"Who looks after the sick here?" he asked 
the assistant. 

Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital 
orderly, came in from the next room, march- 
ing stiffly, and drew up in front of Rost6v. 

"Good day, your honor!" he shouted, roll- 
ing his eyes at Rostov and evidently mistaking 
him for one of the hospital authorities. 

"Get him to his place and give him some 
water," said Rost6v, pointing to the Cossack. 

"Yes, your honor," the soldier replied com- 
placently, and rolling his eyes more than ever 
he drew himself up still straighter, but did not 
move. 

"No, it's impossible to do anything here," 
thought Rost6v, lowering his eyes, and he was 
going out, but became aware of an intense look 
fixed on him on his right, and he turned. Close 
to the corner, on an overcoat, sat an old, un- 
shaven, gray-bearded soldier as thin as a skele- 
ton, with a stern sallow face and eyes intently 
fixed on Rost6v. The man's neighbor on one 
side whispered something to him, pointing at 
Rost6v, who noticed that the old man wanted 
to speak to him. He drew nearer and saw that 
the old man had only one leg bent under him, 
the other had been amputated above the knee. 
His neighbor on the other side, who lay mo- 



BOOK 

tionless some distance from him with his head 
thrown back, was a young soldier with a snub 
nose. His pale waxen face was still freckled 
and his eyes were rolled back. Rost6v looked 
at the young soldier and a cold chill ran down 
his back. 

"Why, this one seems . . ." he began, turning 
to the assistant. 

"And how we've been begging, your honor," 
said the old soldier, his jaw quivering. "He's 
been dead since morning. After all we're men, 
not dogs." 

"I'll send someone at once. He shall be tak- 
en away taken a way at once," said the assistant 
hurriedly. "Let us go, your honor." 

"Yes, yes, let us go," said Rost6v hastily, and 
lowering his eyes and shrinking, he tried to 
pass unnoticed between the rows of reproach- 
ful envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and 
went out of the room. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

GOING ALONG the corridor, the assistant led 
Rost6v to the officers' wards, consisting of three 
rooms, the doors of which stood open. There 
were beds in these rooms and the sick and 
wounded officers were lying or sitting on them. 
Some were walking about the rooms in hospital 
dressing gowns. The first person Rostov met 
in the officers' ward was a thin little man with 
one arm, who was walking about the first room 
in a nightcap and hospital dressing gown, with 
a pipe between his teeth. Rost6v looked at him, 
trying to remember where he had seen him be- 
fore. 

"See where we've met again I" said the little 
man. "Tushin, Tiishin, don't you remember, 
who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern? And 
I've had a bit cut off, you see . . ." he went on 
with a smile, pointing to the empty sleeve of 
his dressing gown. "Looking for Vasili Dmft- 
rich Denfsov? My neighbor," he added, when 
he heard who Rost6v wanted. "Here, here," 
and Tiishin led him into the next room, from 
whence came sounds of several laughing voices. 

"How can they laugh, or even live at all 
here?" thought Rost6v, still aware of that 
smell of decomposing flesh that had been so 
strong in the soldiers' ward, and still seeming 
to see fixed on him those envious looks which 
had followed him out from both sides, and the 
face of that young soldier with eyes rolled 
back. 

Denfsov lay asleep on his bed with his head 
under the blanket, though it was nearly noon. 

"Ah, Wost6v? How are you, how are you?" 



FIVE 227 

he called out, still in the same voice as in the 
regiment, but Rost6v noticed sadly that under 
this habitual ease and animation some new, 
sinister, hidden feeling showed itself in the 
expression of Denfsov's face and the intona- 
tions of his voice. 

His wound, though a slight one, had not yet 
healed even now, six weeks after he had been 
hit. His face had the same swollen pallor as the 
faces of the other hospital patients, but it was 
not this that struck Rostov. What struck him 
was that Denfsov did not seem glad to see him, 
and smiled at him unnaturally. He did not 
ask about the regiment, nor about the general 
state of affairs, and when Rost6v spoke of these 
matters did not listen. 

Rostov even noticed that Denfsov did not 
like to be reminded of the regiment, or in gen- 
eral of that other free life which was going on 
outside the hospital. He seemed to try to for- 
get that old life and was only interested in the 
affair with the commissariat officers. On Ros- 
t6v's inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at 
once produced from under his pillow a paper 
he had received from the commission and the 
rough draft of his answer to it. He became ani- 
mated when he began reading his paper and 
specially drew Rostov's attention to the sting- 
ing rejoinders he made to his enemies. His 
hospital companions, who had gathered round 
Rost6v a fresh arrival from the world outside 
gradually began to disperse as soon as Denf- 
sov began reading his answer. Rost6v noticed 
by their faces that all those gentlemen had al- 
ready heard that story more than once and 
were tired of it. Only the man who had the 
next bed, a stout Uhlan, continued to sit on 
his bed, gloomily frowning and smoking a 
pipe, and little one-armed Tiishin still lis- 
tened, shaking his head disapprovingly. In the 
middle of the reading, the Uhlan interrupted 
Denisov. 

"But what I say is," he said, turning to Ros- 
t6v, "it would be best simply to petition the 
Emperor for pardon. They say great rewards 
will now be distributed, and surely a pardon 
would be granted. . . ." 

"Me petition the Einpcwo' 1 " exclaimed Denf- 
sov, in a voice to which he tried hard to give 
the old energy and fire, but which sounded like 
an expression of irritable impotence. "What 
for? If I were a wobber I would ask mercy, but 
I'm being court-martialed for bwinging wob- 
bers to book. Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid 
of anyone. I'veserved the Tsar and mycountwy 
honowably and have not stolen! And am I to 



2*8 



WAR AND PEACE 



be degwaded? , . . Listen, I'm w'iting to them 
stwaight. This is what I say: 'If I had wobbed 
the Tweasuwy . . .' " 

"It's certainly well written," said Tiishin, 
"but that's not the point, Vasili Dmitrich," 
and he also turned to Rost6v. "One has to sub- 
mit, and Vasili Dmftrich doesn't want to. You 
know the auditor told you it was a bad busi- 
ness." 

"Well, let it be bad," said Denfsov. 

"The auditor wrote out a petition for you," 
continued Tiishin, "and you ought to sign it 
and ask this gentleman to take it. No doubt he" 
(indicating Rost6v) "has connections on the 
staff. You won't find a better opportunity." 

"Haven't I said I'm not going to gwovel?" 
Denfsov interrupted him, and went on read- 
ing his paper. 

Rostov had not the courage to persuade 
Denisov, though he instinctively felt that the 
way advised by Tiishin and the other officers 
was the safest, and though he would have been 
glad to be of service to Denisov. He knew his 
stubborn will and straightforward hasty tem- 

M*r. 

) When the reading of Denisov's virulent re- 
'ply, which took more than an hour, was over, 
Rost6v said nothing, and he spent the rest of 
the day in a most dejected state of mind amid 
Denisov's hospital comrades, who had gathered 
round him, telling them what he knew and lis- 
tening to their stories. Denisov was moodily 
silent all the evening. 

Late in the evening, when Rost6v was about 
to leave, he asked Denisov whether he had no 
commission for him. 

"Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, glancing 
round at the officers, and taking his papers 
from under his pillow he went to the window, 
where he had an inkpot, and sat down to write. 

"It seems it's no use knocking one's head 
against a walll" he said, coming from the win- 
dow and giving Rost6v a large envelope. In it 
was the petition to the Emperor drawn up by 
the auditor, in which Denisov, without allud- 
ing to the offenses of the commissariat officials, 
simply asked for pardon. 

"Hand it in. It seems . . ." 

He did not finish, but gave a painfully un- 
natural smile. 

CHAPTER XIX 

HAVING RETURNED to the regiment and told 
the commander the state of Denisov's affairs, 
Rost6v rode to Tilsit with the letter to the 
Emperor. 



On the thirteenth of June the French and 
Russian Emperors arrived in Tilsit. Boris Dru- 
betsk6y had asked the important personage on 
whom he was in attendance, to include him in 
the suite appointed for the stay at Tilsit. 

"I should like to see the great man," he said, 
alluding to Napoleon, whom hitherto he, like 
everyone else, had always called Buonaparte. 

"You are speaking of Buonaparte?" asked 
the general, smiling. 

Boris looked at his general inquiringly and 
immediately saw that he was being tested. 

"I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Na- 
poleon," he replied. The general patted him 
on the shoulder, with a smile. 

"You will go far," he said, and took him to 
Tilsit with him. 

Boris was among the few present at the Nie- 
men on the day the two Emperors met. He saw 
the raft, decorated with monograms, saw Napo- 
leon pass before the French Guards on the 
farther bank of the river, saw the pensive face 
of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence 
in a tavern on the bank of the Niemen await- 
ing Napoleon's arrival, saw both Emperors get 
into boats, and saw how Napoleon reaching 
the raft first stepped quickly forward to meet 
Alexander and held out his hand to him, arid 
how they both retired into the pavilion. Since 
he had begun to move in the highest circles 
Boris had made it his habit to watch attentive- 
ly all that went on around him and to note it 
down. At the time of the meeting at Tilsit he 
asked the names of those who had come with 
Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore, 
and listened attentively to words spoken by im- 
portant personages. At the moment the Em- 
perors went into the pavilion he looked at his 
watch, and did not forget to look at it again 
when Alexander came out. The interview had 
lasted an hour and fifty-three minutes. He 
noted this down that same evening, among oth- 
er facts he felt to be of historic importance. As 
the Emperor's suite was a very small one, it was 
a matter of great importance, for a man who 
valued his success in the service, to be at Tilsit 
on the occasion of this interview between the 
two Emperors, and having succeeded in this, 
Boris felt that henceforth his position was ful- 
ly assured. He had not only become known, 
but people had grown accustomed to him and 
accepted him. Twice he had executed commis- 
sions to the Emperor himself, so that the latter 
knew his face, and all those at court, far from 
cold-shouldering him as at first when they con- 
sidered him a newcomer, would now have been 



BOOK FIVE 



229 



surprised had he been absent. 

Borfs lodged with another adjutant, the Pol- 
ish Count Zhilinski. Zhilinski, a Pole brought 
up in Paris, was rich, and passionately fond of 
the French, and almost every day of the stay at 
Tilsit, French officers of the Guard and from 
French headquarters were dining and lunch- 
ing with him and Boris. 

On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, 
Count Zhilfnski arranged a supper for his 
French friends. The guest of honor was an aide- 
de-camp of Napoleon's, there were also several 
French officers of the Guard, and a page of Na- 
poleon's, a young lad of an old aristocratic 
French family. That same day, Rost6v, profit- 
ing by the darkness to avoid being recognized 
in civilian dress, came to Tilsit and went to the 
lodging occupied by Borfs and Zhilinski. 

Rostov, in common with the whole army 
from which he came, was far from having ex- 
perienced the change of feeling toward Napo- 
leon and the French who from being foes had 
suddenly become friends that had taken place 
at headquarters and in Boris. In the army, Bon- 
aparte and the French were still regarded with 
mingled feelings of anger, contempt, and fear. 
Only recently, talkingwith one of PLltov's Cos- 
sack officers, Rost6v had argued that if Napole- 
on were taken prisoner he would be treated not 
as a sovereign, but as a criminal. Quite lately, 
happening to meet a wounded French colonel 
on the road, Rost6v had maintained with heat 
that peace was impossible between a legitimate 
sovereign and the criminal Bonaparte. Rost6v 
was therefore unpleasantly struck by the pres- 
ence of French officers in Boris' lodging, dressed 
in uniforms he had been accustomed to see 
from quite a different point of view from the 
outposts of the flank. As soon as he noticed a 
French officer, who thrust his head out of the 
door, that warlike feeling of hostility which he 
always experienced at the sight of the enemy 
suddenly seized him. He stopped at the thresh- 
old and asked in Russian whether Drubetsk6y 
lived there. Boris, hearing a strange voice in 
the anteroom, came out to meet him. An ex- 
pression of annoyance showed itself for a mo- 
ment on his face on first recognizing Rost6v. 

"Ah, it's you? Very glad, very glad to see you," 
he said, however, coming toward him with a 
smile. But Rost6v had noticed his first impulse. 

"I've come at a bad time I think. I should 
not have come, but I have business," he said 
coldly. 

"No, I only wonder how you managed to get 
away from your regiment. Dans un moment jc 



suis &amp; vous," l he said, answering someone who 
called him. 

"I see I'm intruding," Rost6v repeated. 

The look of annoyance had already disap- 
peared from Borfs' face: having evidently re- 
flected and decided how to act, he very quiet- 
ly took both Rost6v's hands and led him into 
the next room. His eyes, looking serenely and 
steadily at Rost6v, seemed to be veiled by some- 
thing, as if screened by blue spectacles of con- 
ventionality. So it seemed to Rost6v. 

"Oh, come now! As if you could come at a 
wrong time!" said Boris, and he led him into 
the room where the supper table was laid and 
introduced him to his guests, explaining that 
he was not a civilian, but an hussar officer, and 
an old friend of his. 

"Count Zhilinski le Comic N. N. le Capi- 
taine S. S.," said he, naming his guests. Rost6v 
looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, bowed 
reluctantly, and remained silent. 

Zhilinski evidently did not receive this new 
Russian person very willingly into his circle 
and did not speak to Rost6v. Boris did not ap- 
pear to notice the constraint the newcomer 
produced and, with the same pleasant compo- 
sure and the same veiled look in his eyes with 
which he had met Rost6v, tried to enliven the 
conversation. One of the Frenchmen, with the 
politeness characteristic of his countrymen, ad- 
dressed the obstinately taciturn Rost6v, say- 
ing that the latter had probably come to Tilsit 
to see the Emperor. 

"No, 1 came on business," replied Rostov, 
briefly. 

Rostov had been out of humor from the mo- 
ment he noticed the look of dissatisfaction on 
Boris' face, and as always happens to those in 
a bad humor, it seemed to him that everyone 
regarded him with aversion and that he was in 
everybody's way. He really was in their way, 
for he alone took no part in the conversation 
which again became general. The looks the 
visitors cast on him seemed to say: "And what 
is he sitting here for?" He rose and went up to 
Borfs. 

"Anyhow, I'm in your way," he said in a low 
tone. "Corrie and talk over my business and I'll 
go away." 

"Oh, no, not at all," said Borfs. "But if you 
are tired, come and lie down in my room and 
have a rest." 

"Yes, really . . ." 

They went into the little room where Boris 
slept. Rost6v, without sitting down, began at 

1 "In a minute I shall be at your disposal." 



230 



WAR AND PEACE 



once, irritably (as if Boris were to blame in 
some way) telling him about Denisov's affair, 
asking him whether, through his general, he 
could and would intercede with the Emperor 
on Denisov's behalf and get Denisov's petition 
handed in. When he and Boris were alone, Ros- 
t6v felt for the first time that he could not look 
Boris in the face without a sense of awkward- 
ness. Boris, with one leg crossed over the other 
and stroking his left hand with the slender fin- 
gers of his right, listened to Rost6v as a general 
listens to the report of a subordinate, now look- 
ing aside and now gazing straight into Rost6v's 
eyes with the same veiled look. Each time this 
happened Rost6v felt uncomfortable and cast 
down his eyes. 

"I have heard of such cases and know that 
His Majesty is very severe in such affairs. I 
think it would be best not to bring it before the 
Emperor, but to apply to the commander of 
the corps. . . . But in general, I think . . ." 

"So you don't want to do anything? Well 
then, say so!" Rostov almost shouted, not look- 
ing Boris in the face. 

Boris smiled. 

"On the contrary, I will do what I can. Only 
I thought . . ." 

At that moment Zhilfnski's voice was heard 
calling Boris. 

"Well then, go, go, go . . ." said Rost6v, and 
refusing supper and remaining alone in the 
little room, he walked up and down for a long 
time, hearing the lighthearted French conver- 
sation from the next room. 

CHAPTER XX 

ROSTOV HAD COME toTilsiton the day least suit- 
able for a petition on Denisov's behalf. He 
could not himself go to the general in attend- 
ance as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit 
without permission to do so, and Boris, even 
had he wished to, could not have done so on 
the following day. On that day, June 27, the 
preliminaries of peace were signed. The Em- 
perors exchanged decorations: Alexander re- 
ceived the Cross of the Legion of Honor and 
Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the First 
Degree, and a dinner had been arranged for 
the evening, given by a battalion of the French 
Guards to the Preobrazhdnsk battalion. The 
Emperors were to be present at that banquet. 

Rost6v felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable 
with Boris that, when the latter looked in after 
supper, he pretended to be asleep, and early 
next morning went away, avoiding Boris. In his 
civilian clothes and a round hat, he wandered 



about the town, staring at the French and 
their uniforms and at the streets and houses 
where the Russian and French Emperors were 
staying. In a square he saw tables being set up 
and preparations made for the dinner; he saw 
the Russian and French colors draped from side 
to side of the streets, with hugh monograms 
A and AT. In the windows of the houses also 
flags and bunting were displayed. 

"Boris doesn't want to help me and I don't 
want to ask him. That's settled," thought Nich- 
olas. "All is over between us, but I won't leave 
here without having done all I can for Denisov 
and certainly not without getting his letter to 
the Emperor. The Emperor! . . . He is here!" 
thought Rost6v, who had unconsciously re- 
turned to the house where Alexander lodged. 

Saddled horses were standing before the 
house and the suite were assembling, evidently 
preparing for the Emperor to come out. 

"I may see him at any moment," thought Ros- 
t6v. "If only I were to hand the letter direct to 
him and tell him all ... could they really ar- 
rest me for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He 
would understand on whose side justice lies. 
He understands everything, knows everything. 
Who can be more just, more magnanimous 
than he? And even if they did arrest me for be- 
ing here, what would it matter?" thought he, 
looking at an officer who was entering the 
house the Emperor occupied. "After all, peo- 
ple do go in. ... It's all nonsense! I'll go in 
and hand the letter to the Emperor myself, so 
much the worse for Drubetsk6y who drives me 
to it!" And suddenly with a determination he 
himself did not expect, Rost6v felt for the let- 
ter in his pocket and went straight to the house. 

"No, I won't miss my opportunity now, as I 
did after Austerlitz," he thought, expecting ev- 
ery moment to meet the monarch, and con- 
scious of the blood that rushed to his heart at 
the thought. "I will fall at his feet and beseech 
him. He will lift me up, will listen, and will 
even thank me. 'I am happy when I can do 
good, but to remedy injustice is the greatest 
happiness,' " Rost6v fancied the sovereign 
saying. And passing people who looked after 
him with curiosity, he entered the porch of 
the Emperor's house. 

A broad staircase led straight up from the 
entry, and to the right he saw a closed door. 
Below, under the staircase, was a door leading 
to the lower floor. 

"Whom do you want?" someone inquired. 

"To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Maj- 
esty/' said Nicholas, with a tremor in his voice. 



BOOK FIVE 



231 



"A petition? This way, to the officer on duty" 
(he was shown the door leading downstairs), 
"only it won't be accepted." 

On hearing this indifferent voice, Rost6v 
grew frightened at what he was doing; the 
thought of meeting the Emperor at any mo- 
ment was so fascinating and consequently so 
alarming that he was ready to run away, but 
the official who had questioned him opened the 
door, and Rost6v entered. 

A short stout man of about thirty, in white 
breeches and high boots and a batiste shirt that 
he had evidently only just put on, was standing 
in that room, and his valet was buttoning on to 
the back of his breeches a new pair of hand- 
some silk-embroidered braces that, for some 
reason, attracted Rostov's attention. This man 
was speaking to someone in the ad join ing room. 

"A good figure and in her first bloom," he 
was saying, but on seeing Rost6v, he stopped 
short and frowned. 

"What is it? A petition?" 

"What is it?" asked the person in the other 
room. 

"Another petitioner," answered the man 
with the braces. 

"Tell him to come later. He'll be coming out 
directly, we must go." 

"Later . . . later! Tomorrow. It's too late " 

Rostov turned and was about to go, but the 
man in the braces stopped him. 

"Whom have you come from? Who are you?" 

"I come from Major Denisov," answered 
Rost6v. 

"Are you an officer?" 

"Lieutenant Count Rostov." 

"What audacity! Hand it in through your 
commander. And go along with you . . . go," 
and he continued to put on the uniform the 
valet handed him. 

Rost6v went back into the hall and noticed 
that in the porch there were many officers and 
generals in full parade uniform, whom he had 
to pass. 

Cursing his temerity, his heart sinking at the 
thought of finding himself at any moment face 
to face with the Emperor and being put to shame 
and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to 
the impropriety of his conduct and repenting 
of it, Rost6v, with downcast eyes, was making 
his way out of the house through the brilliant 
suite when a familiar voice called him and a 
hand detained him. 

"What are you doing here, sir, in civilian 
dress?" asked a deep voice. 

It was a cavalry general who had obtained 



the Emperor's special favor during this cam- 
paign, and who had formerly commanded the 
division in which Rost6v was serving. 

Rost6v, in dismay, began justifying himself, 
but seeing the kindly, jocular face of the gener- 
al, he took him aside and in an excited voice 
told him the whole affair, asking him to inter- 
cede for Denfsov, whom the general knew. Hav- 
ing heard Rost6v to the end, the general shook 
his head gravely. 

"I'm sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. Give 
me the letter." 

Hardly had Rost6v handed him the letter 
and finished explaining Denfsov's case, when 
hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard 
on thestairs,and thegeneral, leaving him, went 
to the porch. The gentlemen of the Emperor's 
suite ran down the stairs and went to their 
horses. Hayne, the same groom who had been 
at Austerlitz, led up the Emperor's horse, and 
the faint creak of a footstep Rost6v knew at 
once was heard on the stairs. Forgetting the 
danger of being recognized, Rostov went close 
to the porch, together with some inquisitive 
civilians, and again, after two years, saw those 
features he adored: that same face and same 
look and step, and the same union of majesty 
and mildness. . . . And the feeling of enthusi- 
asm and love for his sovereign rose again in 
Rostov's soul in all its old force. In the uniform 
of the Preobrazh^nsk regiment white chamois- 
leather breeches and high boots and wearing 
a star Rost6v did not know (it was that of the 
Legion d'honneur), the monarch came out in- 
to the porch, putting on his gloves and carry- 
ing his hat under his arm. He stopped and 
looked about him, brightening everything 
around by his glance. He spoke a few words to 
some of the generals, and, recognizing the for- 
mer commander of Rost6v's division, smiled 
and beckoned to him. 

All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the 
general talking for some time to the Emperor. 

The Emperor said a few words to him and 
took a step toward his horse. Again the crowd 
of members of the suite and street gazers 
(amongwhomwas Rost6v) moved nearer to the 
Emperor. Stopping beside his horse, with his 
hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the 
cavalry general and said in a loud voice, evi- 
dently wishing to be heard by all: 

"I cannot do it, General. I cannot, because 
the law is stronger than I," and he raised his 
foot to the stirrup. 

Thegeneral bowed his head respectfully, and 
the monarch mounted and rodedown thestreet 



WAR AND PEACE 



at a gallop. Beside himself with enthusiasm, 
Rost6v ran after him with the crowd. 

CHAPTER XXI 

THE EMPEROR rode to the square where, facing 
one another, a battalion of the Preobrazhnsk 
regiment stood on the right and a battalion of 
the French Guards in their bearskin caps on 
the left. 

As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the bat- 
talions, which presented arms, another group 
of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank, 
and at the head of them Rostov recognized Na- 
poleon. It could be no one else. He came at a 
gallop, wearing a small hat, a blue uniform 
open over a white vest, and the St. Andrew rib- 
bon over his shoulder. He was riding a very 
fine thoroughbred gray Arab horsewith a crim- 
son gold-embroidered saddlecloth. On ap- 
proaching Alexander he raised his hat, and as 
he did so, Rost6v, with his cavalryman's eye, 
could not help noticing that Napoleon did not 
sit well or firmly in the saddle. The battalions 
shouted "Hurrah!" and "Vive I'Empereur!" 
Napoleon said something to Alexander, and 
both Emperors dismounted and took each oth- 
er's hands. Napoleon's face wore an unpleas- 
ant and artificial smile. Alexander was saying 
something affable to him. 

In spite of the trampling of the French gen- 
darmes' horses, which were pushing back the 
crowd, Rost6vkept his eyes on every movement 
of Alexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as 
a surprise that Alexander treated Bonaparte as 
an equal and that the latter was quite at ease 
with the Tsar, as if such relations with an Em- 
peror were an everyday matter to him. 

Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train 
of their suites, approached the right flank of 
the Preobrazh^nsk battalion and came straight 
up to the crowd standing there. The crowd un- 
expectedly found itself so close to the Emper- 
ors that Rostov, standing in the front row, was 
afraid he might be recognized. 

"Sire, I ask your permission to present the 
Legion of Honor to the bra vest of your soldiers," 
said a sharp, precise voice, articulating every 
letter. 

This was said by the undersized Napoleon, 
looking up straight into Alexander's eyes. 
Alexander listened attentively to what was 
said to him and, bending his head, smiled 
pleasantly. 

"To him who has borne himself most brave- 
ly in this last war," added Napoleon, accentuat- 
ing each syllable, as with a composure and as- 



surance exasperating to Rost6v, he ran his eyes 
over the Russian ranks drawn up before him, 
who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on 
their Emperor. 

"Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the 
colonel?" said Alexander and took a few hasty 
steps toward Prince Kozldvski, the commander 
of the battalion. 

Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove 
off his small white hand, tore it in doing so, 
and threw it away. An aide-de-camp behind 
him rushed forward and picked it up. 

"To whom shall it be given?" the Emperor 
Alexander asked Kosl6vski, in Russian in a 
low voice. 

"To whomever Your Majesty commands." 

The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfac- 
tion and, glancing back, remarked: 

"But we must give him an answer." 

Kozl6vski scanned the ranks resolutely and 
included Rostov in his scrutiny. 

"Can it be me?" thought Rost6v. 

"Ldzarevl" the colonel called, with a frown, 
and Ldzarev, the first soldier in the rank, 
stepped briskly forward. 

"Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices 
whispered to Ldzarev who did not know where 
to go. Ldzarev stopped, casting a sidelong look 
at his colonel in alarm. His face twitched, as 
often happens to soldiers called before the 
ranks. 

Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put 
his plump little hand out behind him as if to 
take something. The members of his suite, guess- 
ing at once what he wanted, moved about and 
whispered as they passed something from one 
to another, and a page the same one Rost6v 
had seen the previous evening at Boris' -ran 
forward and, bowing respectfully over the out- 
stretched hand and not keeping it waiting a 
moment, laid in it an Order on a red ribbon. 
Napoleon, without looking, pressed two fingers 
together and the badge was between them. 
Then he approached Ldzarev (who rolled his 
eyes and persistently gazed at his own mon- 
arch), looked round at the Emperor Alexander 
to imply that what he was now doing was done 
for the sake of his ally, and the small white 
hand holding the Order touched one of Lza- 
rev's buttons. It was as if Napoleon knew that 
it was only necessary for his hand to deign to 
touch that soldier's breast for the soldier to be 
forever happy, rewarded, and distinguished 
from everyone else in the world. Napoleon 
merely laid the cross on Ldzarev's breast and, 
dropping his hand, turned toward Alexander 



BOOK FIVE 



as though sure that the cross would adhere 
there. And it really did. 

Officious hands, Russian and French, im- 
mediately seized the cross and fastened it to the 
uniform. Ldzarev glanced morosely at the lit- 
tle man with white hands who was doing some- 
thing to him and, still standing motionless pre- 
senting arms, looked again straight into Alex- 
ander's eyes, as if asking whether he should 
stand there, or go away, or do something else. 
But receiving no orders, he remained for some 
time in that rigid position. 

The Emperors remounted and rode away. 
The Preobrazhe*nsk battalion, breaking rank, 
mingled with the French Guards and sat down 
at the tables prepared for them. 

Lazarev sat in the place of honor. Russian 
and French officers embraced him, congratulat- 
ed him, and pressed his hands. Crowds of offi- 
cers and civilians drew near merely to see him. 
A rumble of Russian and French voices and 
laughter filled the air round the tables in the 
square. Two officers with flushed faces, look- 
ing cheerful and happy, passed by Rost6v. 

"What d'you think of the treat? All on silver 
plate," one of them was saying. "Have you seen 
Lazarev?" 

"I have." 

"Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhnskiswill 
give them a dinner." 

"Yes, but what luck for Ldzarev! Twelve 
hundred francs' pension for life." 

"Here's a cap, lads!" shouted a Preobraz- 
hdnsk soldier, donning a shaggy French cap. 

"It's a fine thing! First-rate!" 

"Have you heard the password?" asked one 
Guards' officer of another. "The day before yes- 
terday it was 'Napoldon, France, bravoure'; 
yesterday, 'Alexandre, Russie, grandeur.' One 
day our Emperor gives it and next day Napo- 
leon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. 
George's Cross to the bravest of the French 
Guards. It has to be done. He must respond in 
kind." 

Borfs, too, with his friend Zhilfnski, came to 
see the Preobrazhdnsk banquet. On his way 
back, he noticed Rost6v standing by the cor- 
ner of a house. 

"Rost6v! How d'you do? We missed one an- 
other," he said, and could not refrain from ask- 
ing what was the matter, so strangely dismal 
and troubled was Rost6v's face. 

"Nothing, nothing," replied Rost6v. 

"You'll call round?" 

"Yes, I will." 

Rost6v stood at that corner for a long time, 



watching the feast from a distance. In his mind, 
a painful process was going on which he could 
not bring to a conclusion. Terrible doubts rose 
in his soul. Now he remembered Denisov with 
his changed expression, his submission, and the 
whole hospital, with arms and legs torn off and 
its dirt and disease. So vividly did he recall that 
hospital stench of dead flesh that he looked 
round to see where the smell came from. Next 
he thought of that self-satisfied Bonaparte, 
with his small white hand, who was now an Em- 
peror, liked and respected by Alexander. Then 
why those severed arms and legs and those dead 
men? . . . Then again he thought of Ldzarev re- 
warded and Denfsov punished and unpar- 
doned. He caught himself harboring such 
strange thoughts that he was frightened. 

The smell of the food the Preobrazhnskis 
were eating and a sense of hunger recalled him 
from these reflections; he had to get something 
to eat before going away. He went to a hotel he 
had noticed that morning. There he found so 
many people, among them officers who, like 
himself, had come in civilian clothes, that he 
had difficulty in getting a dinner. Two officers 
of his own division joined him. The conversa- 
tion naturally turned on the peace. The offi- 
cers, his comrades, like most of the army, were 
dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the 
battle of Friedland. They said that had we held 
out a little longer Napoleon would have been 
done for, as his troops had neither provisions 
nor ammunition. Nicholas ate and drank 
(chiefly the latter) in silence. He finished a 
couple of bottles of wine by himself. The pro- 
cess in his mind went on tormenting him with- 
out reaching a conclusion. He feared to give 
way to his thoughts, yet could not get rid of 
them. Suddenly, on one of the officers' saying 
that it was humiliating to look at the French, 
Rostov began shouting with uncalled-for wrath, 
and therefore much to the surprise of the offi- 
cers: 

"How can you judge what's best?" he cried, 
the blood suddenly rushing to his face. "How 
can you judge the Emperor's actions? What 
right have we to argue? We cannot compre- 
hend either the Emperor'saims or his actions!" 

"But I never said a word about the Emper- 
or!" said the officer, justifying himself, and un- 
able to understand Rostov's outburst, except 
on the supposition that he was drunk. 

But Rost6v did not listen to him. 

"We are not diplomatic officials, we are sol- 
diers and nothing more," he went on. "If we 
are ordered to die, we must die. If we're pun- 



234 



WAR AND PEACE 



ished, it means that we have deserved it, it's 
not for us to judge. If the Emperor pleases to 
recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to con- 
clude an alliance with him, it means that that 
is the right thing to do. If once we begin judg- 
ing and arguing about everything, nothing sa- 
cred will be left! That way we shall be saying 
there is no God nothing!" shouted Nicholas, 
banging the table very little to the point as it 
seemed to his listeners, but quite relevantly to 
the course of his own thoughts. 

"Our business is to do our duty, to fight and 
not to think! That's all " said he. 

"And to drink/' said one of the officers, not 
wishing to quarrel. 

"Yes, and to drink, "assented Nicholas. "Hul- 
lo there! Another bottle!" he shouted. 

In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Er- 
furt for a fresh interview with the Emperor Na- 
poleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburg 
there was much talk of the grandeur of this 
important meeting. 



CHAPTER XXII 

In 1809 the intimacy between "the world's 
two arbiters," as Napoleon and Alexander were 
called, was such that when Napoleon declared 
war on Austria a Russian corps crossed the 
frontier to co-operate with our old enemy 
Bonaparte against our old ally the Emperor of 
Austria, and in court circles the possibility of 
marriage between Napoleon and one of Al- 
exander's sisters was spoken of. But besides 
considerations of foreign policy, the attention 
of Russian society was at that time keenly di- 
rected on the internal changes that were being 
undertaken in all the departments of govern- 
ment. 

Life meanwhile real life, with its essential 
interests of health and sickness, toil and rest, 
and its intellectual interests in thought, sci- 
ence, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, 
and passions went on as usual, independently 
of and apart from political friendship or en- 
mity with Napoleon Bonaparte and from all 
the schemes of reconstruction. 



Book Six: 1808-10 



CHAPTER I 

PRINCE ANDREW had spent two years continu- 
ously in the country. 

All the plans Pierre had attempted on his es- 
tatesand constantly changing from one thing 
to another had never accomplishedwere car- 
ried out by Prince Andrew without display and 
without perceptible difficulty. 

He had in the highest degree a practical te- 
nacity which Pierre lacked, and without fuss 
or strain on his part this set things going. 

On one of his estates the three hundred serfs 
were liberated and became free agricultural 
laborers this being one of the first examples 
of the kind in Russia. On other estates the 
serfs' compulsory labor was commuted for a 
quitrent. A trained midwife was engaged for 
Bogucharovo at his expense, and a priest was 
paid to teach reading and writing to the chil- 
dren of the peasants and household serfs. 

Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald 
Hills with his father and his son, who was still 
in the care of nurses. The other half he spent 
in "Bogucharovo Cloister/' as his father called 
Prince Andrew's estate. Despite the indiffer- 
ence to the affairs of the world he had expressed 
to Pierre, he diligently followed all that went 
on, received many books, and to his surprise 
noticed that when he or his father had visitors 
from Petersburg, the very vortex of life, these 
people lagged behind himself who never left 
the country in knowledge of what was hap- 
pening in home and foreign affairs. 

Besides being occupied with his estates and 
reading a great variety of books, Prince An- 
drew was at this time busy with a critical sur- 
vey of our last two unfortunate campaigns, and 
with drawing up a proposal for a reform of the 
army rules and regulations. 

In the spring of 1 809 he went to visit the Ry- 
azdn estates which had been inherited by his 
son, whose guardian he was. 

Warmed by the spring sunshine he sat in 
the caliche looking at the new grass, the first 
leaves on th birches, and the first puffs of 



white spring clouds floating across the clear 
blue sky. He was not thinking of anything, but 
looked absent-mindedly and cheerfully from 
side to side. 

They crossed the ferry where he had talked 
with Pierre the year before. They went through 
the muddy village, past threshing floors and 
green fields of winter rye, downhill where snow 
still lodged near the bridge, uphill where the 
clay had been liquefied by the rain, past strips 
of stubble land and bushes touched with green 
here and there, and into a birch forest grow- 
ing on both sides of the road. In the forest it 
was almost hot, no wind could be felt. The 
birches with their sticky green leaves were mo- 
tionless, and lilac-colored flowers and the first 
blades of green grass were pushing up and 
lifting last year's leaves. The coarse evergreen 
color of the small fir trees scattered here and 
there among the birches was an unpleasant re- 
minder of winter. On entering the forest the 
horses began to snort and sweated visibly. 

Peter the footman made some remark to the 
coachman; the latter assented. But apparently 
the coachman's sympathy was not enough for 
Peter, and he turned on the box toward his 
master. 

"How pleasant it is, your excellency!" he said 
with a respectful smile. 

"What?" 

"It's pleasant, your excellency!" 

"What is he talking about?" thought Prince 
Andrew. "Oh, the spring, I suppose," he 
thought as he turned round. "Yes, really every- 
thing is green already. . . . How early! The 
birches and cherry and alders too are coming 
out. . . . But the oaks show no sign yet. Ah, here 
is one oak!" 

At the edge of the road stood an oak. Prob- 
ably ten times the age of the birches that formed 
the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice as 
tall as they. It was an enormous tree, its girth 
twice as great as a man could embrace, and evi- 
dently long ago some of its branches had been 
broken off and its bark scarred. With its huge 



WAR AND PEACE 



ungainly limbs sprawling unsymmetrically, 
and its gnarled hands and fingers, it stood an 
aged, stern, and scornful monster among the 
smiling birch trees. Only the dead-looking ev- 
ergreen firs dotted about in the forest, and this 
oak, refused to yield to the charm of spring or 
notice either the spring or the sunshine. 

"Spring, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to 
say. "Are you not weary of that stupid, mean- 
ingless, constantly repeated fraud? Always the 
same and always a fraud! There is no spring, 
no sun, no happiness! Look at those cramped 
dead firs, ever the same, and at me too, stick- 
ing out my broken and barked fingers just 
where they have grown, whether from my back 
or my sides: as they have grown so I stand, and 
I do not believe in your hopes and your lies." 

As he passed through the forest Prince An- 
drew turned several times to look at that oak, 
as if expecting something from it. Under the 
oak, too, were flowers and grass, but it stood 
among them scowling, rigid, misshapen, and 
grim as ever. 

"Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right," 
thought Prince Andrew. "Let others the young 
yield afresh to that fraud, but we know life, 
our life is finished!" 

A whole sequence of new thoughts, hopeless 
but mournfully pleasant, rose in his soul in 
connection with that tree. During this journey 
he, as it were, considered his life afresh and ar- 
rived at his old conclusion, restful in its hope- 
lessness: that it was not for him to begin any- 
thing anew but that he must live out his life, 
content to do no harm, and not disturbing 
himself or desiring anything. 

CHAPTER II 

PRINCE ANDREW had to see the Marshal of the 
Nobility for the district in connection with the 
affairs of the Ryazan estate of which he was 
trustee. This Marshal was Count Ilyd Rost6v, 
and in the middle of May Prince Andrew went 
to visit him. 

It was now hot spring weather. The whole 
forest was already clothed in green. It was 
dusty and so hot that on passing near water one 
longed to bathe. 

Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied 
with the business about which he had to speak 
to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in 
the grounds of the Rost6vs' house at Otradnoe. 
He heard merry girlish cries behind some trees 
on the right and saw a group of girls running to 
cross the path of his caliche. Ahead of the rest 
and nearer to him ran a dark-haired, remark- 



ably slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintz dress, 
wiih a white handkerchief on her head from 
under which loose locks of hair escaped. The 
girl was shouting something but, seeing that he 
was a stranger, ran back laughing without look- 
ing at him. 

Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a 
pang. The day was so beautiful, the sun so 
bright, everything around so gay, but that slim 
pretty girl did not know, or wish to know, of 
his existence and was contented and cheerful 
in her own separate probably foolish but 
bright and happy life. "What is she so glad 
about? What is she thinking of? Not of the mil- 
itary regulations or of the arrangement of the 
Ryazan serfs' quitrents. Of what is she think- 
ing? Why is she so happy?" Prince Andrew 
asked himself with instinctive curiosity. 

In 1809 Count Ilyd Rost6v was living at 
Otrddnoe just as he had done in former years, 
that is, entertaining almost the whole province 
with hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He 
was glad to see Prince Andrew, as he was to 
see any new visitor, and insisted on his staying 
the night. 

During the dull day, in the course of which 
he was entertained by his elderly hosts and by 
the more important of the visitors (the old 
count's house was crowded on account of an 
approaching name day), Prince Andrew repeat- 
edly glanced at Natisha, gay and laughing 
among the younger members of the company, 
and asked himself each time, "What is she 
thinking about? Why is she so glad?" 

That night, alone in new surroundings, he 
was long unable to sleep. He read awhile and 
then put out his candle, but relit it. It was hot 
in the room, the inside shutters of which were 
closed. He was cross with the stupid old man 
(as he called Rost6v), who had made him stay 
by assuring him that some necessary documents 
had not yet arrived from town, and he was vexed 
with himself for having stayed. 

He got up and went to the window to open 
it. As soon as he opened the shutters the moon- 
light, as if it had long been watching for this, 
burst into the room. He opened the casement. 
The night was fresh, bright, and very still. Just 
before the window was a row of pollard trees, 
looking black on one side and with a silvery 
light on the other. Beneath the trees grew some 
kind of lush, wet, bushy vegetation with silver- 
lit leaves and stems here and there. Farther 
back beyond the dark trees a roof glittered with 
dew, to the right was a leafy tree with brilliant- 
ly white trunk and branches, and above it shone 



BOOK SIX 



237 



the moon, nearly at its full, in a pale, almost 
starless, spring sky. Prince Andrew leaned his 
elbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested 
on that sky. 

His room was on the first floor. Those in the 
rooms above were also awake. He heard female 
voices overhead. 

"Just once more," said a girlish voice above 
him which Prince Andrew recognized at once. 

"But when are you coming to bed?" replied 
another voice. 

"I won't, I can't sleep, what's the use? Come 
now for the last time." 

Two girlish voices sang a musical passage 
the end of some song. 

"Oh,howlovelyl Now go to sleep, and there's 
an end of it." 

"You go to sleep, but I can't," said the first 
voice, coming nearer to the window. She was 
evidently leaning right out, for the rustle of 
her dress and even her breathing could be 
heard. Everything was stone-still, like the moon 
and its light and the shadows. Prince Andrew, 
too, dared not stir, for fear of betraying his un- 
intentional presence. 

"S6nyal S6nyal" he again heard the first 
speaker. "Oh, how can you sleep? Only look 
how glorious it is! Ah, how glorious! Do wake 
up, S6nya!" she said almost with tears in her 
voice. "There never, never was such a lovely 
night before!" 

S6nya made some reluctant reply. 

"Do just come and see what a moon! . . . Oh, 
how lovely! Come here. . . . Darling, sweet- 
heart, come here! There, you see? I feel like 
sitting down on my heels, putting my arms 
round my knees like this, straining tight, as 
tight as possible, and flying away! Like this " 

"Take care, you'll fall out." 

He heard the sound of a scuffle and S6nya's 
disapproving voice: "It's past one o'clock." 

"Oh, you only spoil things for me. All right, 

go&gt;g ! " 

Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew 
knew she was still sitting there. From time to 
time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh. 

"O God, O God! What does it mean?" she 
suddenly exclaimed. "To bed then, if it must 
be!" and she slammed the casement. 

"For her I might as well not exist!" thought 
Prince Andrew while he listened to her voice, 
for some reason expecting yet fearing that she 
might say something about him. "There she is 
again! As if it were on purpose," thought he. 

In his soul there suddenly arose such an un- 
expected turmoil of youthful thoughts and 



hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of his life, 
that unable to explain his condition to himself 
he lay down and fell asleep at once. 

CHAPTER III 

NEXT MORNING, having taken leave of no one 
but the count, and not waiting for the ladies to 
appear, Prince Andrew set off for home. 

It was already the beginning of June when 
on his return journey he drove into the birch 
forest where the gnarled old oak had made so 
strange and memorable an impression on him. 
In the forest the harness bells sounded yet more , 
muffled than they had done six weeks before, 
for now all was thick, shady, and dense, and 
the young firs dotted about in the forest did not 
jar on the general beauty but, lending them* 
selves to the mood around, were delicately 
green with fluffy young shoots. 

The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a 
storm was gathering, but only a small cloud . 
had scattered some raindrops lightly, sprin- 
kling the road and the sappy leaves. The left 
side of the forest was dark in the shade, the 
right side glittered in the sunlight, wet and 
shiny and scarcely swayed by the breeze. Every- 
thing was in blossom, the nightingales trilled, 
and their voices reverberated now near, now 
far away. 

"Yes, here in this forest was that oak with 
which I agreed," thought Prince Andrew. "But 
where is it?" he again wondered, gazing at the 
left side of the road, and without recognizing 
it he looked with admiration at the very oak 
he sought. The old oak, quite transfigured, 
spreading out a canopy of sappy dark-green 
foliage, stood rapt and slightly trembling in the 
rays of the evening sun. Neither gnarled fin- 
gers nor old scars nor old doubts and sorrows 
were any of them in evidence now. Through 
the hard century-old bark, even where there 
were no twigs, leaves had sprouted such as one 
could hardly believe the old veteran could have 
produced. 

"Yes, it is the same oak," thought Prince An- 
drew, and all at once he was seized by an un- 
reasoning springtime feeling of joy and renew- 
al. All the best moments of his life suddenly 
rose to his memory. Austerlitz with the lofty 
heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face, 
Pierre at the ferry, that girl thrilled by the 
beauty of the night, and that night itself and 
the moon, and ... all this rushed suddenly to 
his mind. 

"No, life is not over at thirty-one!" Prince 
Andrew suddenly decided finally and decisively. 



838 

"It is not enough for me to know what I have 
in me everyone must know it: Pierre, and 
that young girl who wanted to fly away into the 
sky, everyone must know me, so that my life 
may not be lived for myself alone while others 
live so apart from it, but so that it may be re- 
flected in them all, and they and I may live in 
harmony!" 



On reaching home Prince Andrew decided 
to go to Petersburg that autumn and found all 
sorts of reasons for this decision. A whole series 
of sensible and logical considerations showing 
it to be essential for him to go to Petersburg, 
and even to re-enter the service, kept spring- 
ing up in his mind. He could not now under- 
stand how he could ever even have doubted the 
necessity of taking an active share in life, just 
as a month before he had not understood how 
the idea of leaving the quiet country could 
ever enter his head. It now seemed clear to him 
that all his experience of life must be senseless- 
ly wasted unless he applied it to some kind of 
work and again played an active part in life. 
He did not even remember how formerly, on 
the strength of similar wretched logical argu- 
ments, it had seemed obvious that he would 
be degrading himself if he now, after the les- 
sons he had had in life, allowed himself to be- 
lieve in the possibility of being useful and in 
the possibility of happiness or love. Nowreason 
suggested quite the opposite. After that jour- 
ney to Ryazan he found the country dull; his 
former pursuits no longer interested him, and 
often when sitting alone in his study he got up, 
went to the mirror, and gazed a long time at his 
own face. Then he would turn away to the por- 
trait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled a la 
grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out 
of the gilt frame. She did not now say those 
former terrible words to him, but looked sim- 
ply, merrily, and inquisitively at him. And 
Prince Andrew, crossing his arms behind him, 
Jong paced the room, now frowning, now smil- 
ing, as he reflected on those irrational, inex- 
pressible thoughts, secret as a crime, which al- 
tered his whole life and were connected with 
Pierre, with fame, with the girl at the window, 
the oak, and woman's beauty and love. And if 
anyone came into his room at such moments 
he was particularly cold, stern, and above all 
unpleasantly logical. 

"My dear," Princess Mary entering at such a 
moment would say, "little Nicholas can't go 
out today, it's very cold." 

"If it were hot," Prince Andrew would reply 



WAR AND PEACE 

at such times very dryly to his sister, "he could 
go out in his smock, but as it is cold he must 
wear warm clothes, which were designed for 
that purpose. That is what follows from the 
fact that it is cold; and not that a child who 
needs fresh air should remain at home," he 
would add with extreme logic, as if punishing 
someone for those secret illogical emotions that 
stirred within him. 

At such moments Princess Mary would think 
how intellectual work dries men up. 



CHAPTER IV 

PRINCE ANDREW arrived in Petersburg in Au- 
gust, 1809. It was the time when the youthful 
Sperdnski was at the zenith of his fame and his 
reforms were being pushed forward with the 
greatest energy. That same August the Emper- 
or was thrown from his cal&amp;che, injured his leg, 
and remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiv- 
ing Speranski every day and no one else. At 
that time the two famous decrees were being 
prepared that so agitated societyabolishing 
court ranks and introducing examinations to 
qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor 
and State Councilorand not merely these but 
a whole state constitution, intended to change 
the existing order of government in Russia: le- 
gal, administrative, and financial, from the 
Council of State down to the district tribunals. 
Now those vague liberal dreams with which the 
Emperor Alexander had ascended the throne, 
and which he had tried to put into effect with 
the aid of his associates, Czartoryski, Novosflt- 
sev, Kochubdy, and Str6ganov whom he him- 
self in jest had called his Comitd desalut public 
were taking shape and being realized. 

Now all these men were replaced by Speran- 
ski on the civil side, and Arakche"ev on the mili- 
tary. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as 
a gentleman of the chamber, presented himself 
at court and at a levee. The Emperor, though 
he met him twice, did not favor him with a 
single word. It had always seemed to Prince 
Andrew before that he was antipathetic to the 
Emperor and that the latter disliked his face 
and personality generally, and in the cold, re- 
pellent glance the Emperor gave him, he now 
found further confirmation of this surmise. 
The courtiers explained the Emperor's neglect 
of him by His Majesty's displeasure at Bol- 
k6nski's not having served since 1805. 

"I know myself that one cannot help one's 
sympathies and antipathies," thought Prince 
Andrew, "so it will not do to present my pro- 
posal for the reform of the army regulations to 



BOOK SIX 



the Emperor personally, but the project will 
speak for itself." 

He mentioned what he had written to an 
old field marshal, a friend of his father's. The 
field marshal made an appointment to see him, 
received him graciously, and promised to in- 
form the Emperor. A few days later Prince An- 
drew received notice that he was to go to see 
the Minister of War, Count Arakchev. 

On the appointed day Prince Andrew en- 
tered Count Arakchev's waiting room at nine 
in the morning. 

He did not know Arakch^ev personally, had 
never seen him, and all he had heard of him in- 
spired him with but little respect for the man. 

"He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the 
Emperor, and I need not concern myself about 
his personal qualities: he has been commis- 
sioned to consider my project, so he alone can 
get it adopted/' thought Prince Andrew as he 
waited among a number of important and un- 
important people in Count Arakchev's wait- 
ing room. 

During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, 
Prince Andrew had seen the anterooms of many 
important men, and the different types of such 
rooms were well known to him. Count Arak- 
ch^ev's anteroom had quite a special character. 
The faces of the unimportant people awaiting 
their turn for an audience showed embarrass- 
ment and servility; the faces of those of higher 
rank expressed a common feeling of awkward- 
ness, covered by a mask of unconcern and rid- 
icule of themselves, their situation, and the per- 
son for whom they were waiting. Some walked 
thoughtfully up and down, others whispered 
and laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nick- 
name "SilaAndr^evich" 1 and the words, "Uncle 
will give it to us hot," in reference to Count 
Arakch^ev. One general (an important per- 
sonage), evidently feeling offended at having 
to wait so long, sat crossing and uncrossing his 
legs and smiling contemptuously to himself. 

But the moment the door opened one feel- 
ing alone appeared on all faces that of fear. 
Prince Andrew for the second time asked the 
adjutant on duty to take in his name, but re- 
ceived an ironical look and was told that his 
turn would come in due course. After some 
others had been shown in and out of the min- 
ister's room by the adjutant on duty, an officer 
who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated 
and frightened air was admitted at that terri- 
ble door. This officer's audience lasted a long 

l Sila means "force." 



time. Then suddenly the grating sound of a 
harsh voice was heard from the other side of 
the door, and the officer-with pale face and 
trembling lips came out and passed through 
the waiting room, clutching his head. 

After this Prince Andrew was conducted to 
the door and the officer on duty said in a whis- 
per, "To the right, at the window." 

Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room 
and saw at the table a man of forty with a long 
waist, a long closely cropped head, deep wrin- 
kles, scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel 
eyes and an overhanging red nose. Arakch^ev 
turned his head toward him without looking at 
him. 

"What is your petition?" asked Arakchdev. 

"I am not petitioning, your excellency," re- 
turned Prince Andrew quietly. 

Arakchev's eyes turned toward him. 

"Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolk6nski?" 

"I am not petitioning about anything. His 
Majesty the Emperor has deigned to send your 
excellency a project submitted by me . . ." 

"You see, my dear sir, I have read your proj- 
ect," interrupted Arakch^ev, uttering only the 
first words amiably and then again without 
looking at Prince Andrew relapsing gradual- 
ly into a tone of grumbling contempt. "You 
are proposing new military laws? There are 
many laws but no one to carry out the old ones. 
Nowadays everybody designs laws, it is easier 
writing than doing." 

"I came at His Majesty the Emperor's wish 
to learn from your excellency how you propose 
to deal with the memorandum I have present- 
ed," said Prince Andrew politely. 

"I have endorsed a resolution on your mem- 
orandum and sent it to the committee. I do not 
approve of it," said Arakch^ev, rising and tak- 
ing a paper from his writing table. "Here!" 
and he handed it to Prince Andrew. 

Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, 
without capital letters, misspelled, and with- 
out punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed be- 
cause resembles an imitation of the French mil- 
itary code and from the Articles of War need- 
lessly deviating." 

"To what committee has the memorandum 
been referred?" inquired Prince Andrew. 

"To the Committee on Army Regulations, 
and I have recommended that your honor 
should be appointed a member, but without a 
salary." 

Prince Andrew smiled. 

"I don't want one." 

"A member without salary," repeated Arak- 



240 WAR AND PEACE 

chev. "I have the honor . . . Ehl Call the next 
one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowing to 
Prince Andrew. 



CHAPTER V 

WHILE WAITING for the announcement of his 
appointment to the committee Prince Andrew 
looked up his former acquaintances, particu- 
larly those he knew to be in power and whose 
aid he might need. In Petersburg he now ex- 
perienced the same feeling he had had on the 
eve of a battle, when troubled by anxious cu- 
riosity and irresistibly attracted to the ruling 
circles where the future, on which the fate of 
millions depended, was beingshaped. From the 
irritation of the older men, the curiosity of the 
uninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the 
hurry and preoccupation of everyone, and the 
innumerable committees and commissions of 
whose existence he learned every day, he felt 
that now, in 1809, here in Petersburg a vast 
civil conflict was in preparation, the command- 
er in chief of which was a mysterious person he 
did not know, but who was supposed to be a 
man of genius Speranski. And this movement 
of reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had 
a vague idea, and Sperdnski its chief promoter, 
began to interest him so keenly that the ques- 
tion of the army regulations quickly receded to 
a secondary place in his consciousness. 

Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to 
secure a good reception in the highest and most 
diverse Petersburg circles of the day. The re- 
forming party cordially welcomed and courted 
him, in the first place because he was reputed to 
be clever and very well read, and secondly be- 
cause by liberating his serfs he had obtained 
the reputation of being a liberal. The party of 
the old and dissatisfied, who censured the in- 
novations, turned to him expecting his sympa- 
thy in their disapproval of the reforms, simply 
because he was the son of his father. The fem- 
inine society world welcomed him gladly, be- 
cause he was rich, distinguished, a good match, 
and almost a newcomer, with a halo of romance 
on account of his supposed death and the tragic 
loss of his wife. Besides this the general opin- 
ion of all who had known him previously was 
that he had greatly improved during these last 
five years, having softened and grown more 
manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and 
contemptuous irony, and acquired the serenity 
that comes with years. People talked about 
him, were interested in him, and wanted to 
meet him. 

The day after his interview with Count Ar- 



akch^ev, Prince Andrew spent the evening at 
Count Kochub^y's. He told the count of his 
interview with Sila Andre evich (Kochube*y 
spoke of Arakche*ev by that nickname with the 
same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed 
in the Minister of War's anteroom). 

"Mon cher f even in this case you can't do 
without Michael Mikhdylovich Sperdnski. He 
manages everything. I'll speak to him. He has 
promised to come this evening." 

"What has Speranski to do with the army 
regulations?" asked Prince Andrew. 

Kochube*y shook his head smilingly, as if sur- 
prised at Bolk6nski's simplicity. 

"We were talking to him about you a few days 
ago," Kochube*y continued, "and about your 
freed plowmen." 

"Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your 
serfs?" said an old man of Catherine's day, 
turning contemptuously toward Bolk6nski. 

"It was a small estate that brought in no prof- 
it," replied Prince Andrew, trying to extenuate 
his action so as not to irritate the old man use- 
lessly. 

"Afraid of being late . . ." said the old man, 
looking at Kochubdy. 

"There's one thing I don't understand," he 
continued. "Who will plow the land if they are 
set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficult to 

rule Just the same as now I ask you, Count 

who will be heads of the departments when 
everybody has to pass examinations?" 

"Those who pass the examinations, I sup- 
pose," replied Kochub^y, crossing his legs and 
glancing round. 

"Well, I have Prydniclmikov serving under 
me, a splendid man, a priceless man, but he's 
sixty. Is he to go up for examination?" 

"Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at 
all general, but . . ." 

Count Kochub^ydid not finish. He rose, took 
Prince Andrew by the arm, and went to meet 
a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with a 
large open forehead and a long face of unusu- 
al and peculiar whiteness, who was just enter- 
ing. The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail 
coat with a cross suspended from his neck and a 
star on his left breast. It was Sperdnski. Prince 
Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a 
throb within him, as happens at critical mo- 
ments of life. Whether it was from respect, en- 
vy, or anticipation, he did not know. Speran- 
ski's whole figure was of a peculiar type that 
made him easily recognizable. In the society in 
which Prince Andrew lived he had never seen 
anyone who together with awkward and clum- 



BOOK SIX 



sy gestures possessed such calmness and self- 
assurance; he had never seen so resolute yet 
gentle an expression as that in those half-closed, 
rather humid eyes, or so firm a smile that ex- 
pressed nothing; nor had he heard such a re- 
fined, smooth, soft voice; above all he had nev- 
er seen such delicate whiteness of face or hands 
hands which were broad, but very plump, soft, 
and white. Such whiteness and softness Prince 
Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers 
who had been long in hospital. This was Spe- 
rdnski, Secretary of State, reporter to the Em- 
peror and his companion at Erfurt, where he 
had more than once met and talked with Na- 
poleon. 

Sperdnski did not shift his eyes from one face 
to another as people involuntarily do on en- 
tering a large company and was in no hurry to 
speak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he 
would be listened to, and he looked only at 
the person with whom he was conversing. 

Prince Andrew followed Sperdnski's every 
word and movement with particular attention. 
As happens to some people, especially to men 
who judge those near to them severely, he al- 
ways on meeting anyone newespecially any- 
one whom, like Speranski, he knew by reputa- 
tionexpected to discover in him the perfec- 
tion of human qualities. 

Speranski told Kochubdy he was sorry he 
had been unable to come sooner as he had been 
detained at the palace. He did not say that the 
Emperor had kept him, and Prince Andrew 
noticed this affectation of modesty. When Ko- 
chube*y introduced Prince Andrew, Sperdnski 
slowly turned his eyes to Bolk6nski with his 
customary smile and looked at him in silence. 

"I am very glad to make your acquaintance. 
I had heard of you, as everyone has," he said 
after a pause. 

Kochube"y said a few words about the recep- 
tion Arakch^ev had given Bolk6nski. Sperdnski 
smiled more markedly. 

"The chairman of the Committee on Army 
Regulations is my good friend Monsieur Mag- 
nftski," he said, fully articulating every word 
and syllable, "and if you like I can put you in 
touch with him." He paused at the full stop. 
"I hope you will find him sympathetic and 
ready to co-operate in promoting all that is 
reasonable." 

A circle soon formed round Sperdnski, and 
the old man who had talked about his subordi- 
nate Prydnichnikov addressed a question to 
him. 

Prince Andrew without joining in the con- 



versation watched every movement of Sperdn- 
ski's: this man, not long since an insignificant 
divinity student, who now, Bolk6nski thought, 
held in his hands those plump white hands 
the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck 
by the extraordinarily disdainful composure 
with which Sperdnski answered the old man. 
He appeared to address condescending words 
to him from an immeasurable height. When 
the old man began to speak too loud, Sperdn- 
ski smiled and said he could not judge of the 
advantage or disadvantage of what pleased the 
sovereign. 

Having talked for a little while in the gen- 
eral circle, Sperdnski rose and coming up to 
Prince Andrew took him along to the other 
end of the room. It was clear that he thought it 
necessary to interest himself in Bolk6nski. 

"I had no chance to talk with you, Prince, 
during the animated conversation in which 
that venerable gentleman involved me," he 
said with a mildly contemptuous smile, as if 
intimating by that smile that he and Prince 
Andrew understood the insignificance of the 
people with whom he had just been talking. 
This flattered Prince Andrew. "I have known 
of you for a long time: first from your action 
with regard to your serfs, a first example, of 
which it is very desirable that there should be 
more imitators; and secondly because you are 
one of those gentlemen of the chamber who 
have not considered themselves offended by 
the new decree concerning the ranks allotted 
to courtiers, which is causing so much gossip 
and tittle-tattle." 

"No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did 
not wish me to take advantage of the privilege. 
I began the service from the lower grade." 

"Your father, a man of the last century, evi- 
dently stands above our contemporaries who 
so condemn this measure which merely re- 
establishes natural justice." 

"I think, however, that these condemnations 
have some ground," returned Prince Andrew, 
trying to resist Sperdnski's influence, of which 
he began to be conscious. He did not like to 
agree with him in everything and felt a wish to 
contradict. Though he usually spoke easily and 
well, he felt a difficulty in expressing himself 
now while talking with Sperdnski. He was too 
much absorbed in observing the famous man's 
personality. 

"Grounds of personal ambition maybe," 
Sperdnski put in quietly. 

"And of state interest to some extent," said 
Prince Andrew. 



242 



WAR AND PEACE 



"What do you mean?" asked Sperdnski quiet- 
ly, lowering his eyes. 

"I am an admirer of Montesquieu," replied 
Prince Andrew, "and his idea that le principe 
des monarchies est I'honneur me paratt in- 
contestable. Certains droits et privileges de la 
noblesse me paraissent Stre des moyens de sou- 
tenir ce sentiment." * 

The smile vanished from Sperdnski's white 
face, which was much improved by the change. 
Probably Prince Andrew's thought interested 
him. 

"Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point 
de vue" * he began, pronouncing French with 
evident difficulty, and speaking even slower 
than in Russian but quite calmly. 

Sperdnski went on to say that honor, I'hon- 
neur, cannot be upheld by privileges harmful 
to the service; that honor, I'honneur, is either 
a negative concept of not doing what is blame- 
worthy or it is a source of emulation in pursuit 
of commendation and rewards, which recog- 
nize it. His arguments were concise, simple, 
and clear. 

"An institution upholding honor, the source 
of emulation, is one similar to the Legion 
d'honneurot the great Emperor Napoleon, not 
harmful but helpful to the success of the serv- 
ice, but not a class or court privilege." 

"I do not dispute that, but it cannot be de- 
nied that court privileges have attained the 
same end," returned Prince Andrew. "Every 
courtier considers himself bound to maintain 
his position worthily." 

"Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the 
privilege, Prince," said Sperdnski, indicating 
by a smile that he wished to finish amiably an 
argument which was embarrassing for his com- 
panion. "If you will do me the honor of call- 
ing on me on Wednesday," he added, "I will, 
after talking with Magnitski, let you know 
what may interest you, and shall also have the 
pleasure of a more detailed chat with you." 

Closing his eyes, he bowed a la franfaise, 
without taking leave, and trying to attract as 
little attention as possible, he left the room. 

CHAPTER VI 

DURING the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg 
Prince Andrew felt the whole trend of thought 
he had formed during his life of seclusion quite 

1 "The principle of monarchies is honor seems 
to me incontestable. Certain rights and privileges 
for the aristocracy appear to me a means of main- 
taining that sentiment." 

* "If you regard the question from that point of 
view." 



overshadowed by the trifling cares that en- 
grossed him in that city. 

On returning home in the evening he would 
jot down in his notebook four or five necessary 
calls or appointments for certain hours. The 
mechanism of life, the arrangement of the day 
so as to be in time everywhere, absorbed the 
greater part of his vital energy. He did noth- 
ing, did not even think or find time to think, 
but only talked, and talked successfully, of 
what he had thought while in the country. 

He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction 
that he repeated the same remark on the same 
day in different circles. But he was so busy for 
whole days together that he had no time to no- 
tice that he was thinking of nothing. 

As he had done on their first meeting at Ko- 
chuby's, Sperdnski produced a strong impres- 
sion on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, 
when he received him tthe-d-tte at his own 
house and talked to him long and confiden- 
tially. 

To Bolk6nski so many people appeared con- 
temptible and insignificant creatures, and he 
so longed to find in someone the living ideal of 
that perfection toward which he strove, that he 
readily believed that in Sperdnski he had found 
this ideal of a perfectly rational and virtuous 
man. Had Sperdnski sprung from the same 
class as himself and possessed the same breed- 
ing and traditions, Bolkonski would soon have 
discovered his weak, human, unheroic sides; 
but as it was, Sperdnski's strange and logical 
turn of mind inspired him with respect all the 
more because he did not quite understand him. 
Moreover, Sperdnski, either because he appre- 
ciated the other's capacity or because he con- 
sidered it necessary to win him to his side, 
showed off his dispassionate calm reasonable- 
ness before Prince Andrew and flattered him 
with that subtle flattery which goes hand in 
hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit 
assumption that one's companion is the only 
man besides oneself capable of understanding 
the folly of the rest of mankind and the reason- 
ableness and profundity of one's own ideas. 

During their long conversation on Wednes- 
day evening, Sperdnski more than once re- 
marked: "We regard everything that is above 
the common level of rooted custom . . ." or, 
with a smile: "But we want the wolves to be 
fed and the sheep to be safe . . ." or: "They 
cannot understand this . . ." and all in a way 
that seemed to say: "We, you and I, under- 
stand what they are and who we are/' 

This first long conversation with Sperdnski 



BOOK SIX 



243 



only strengthened in Prince Andrew the feel- 
ing he had experienced toward him at their 
first meeting. He saw in him a remarkable, 
clear-thinking man of vast intellect who by 
his energy and persistence had attained power, 
which he was using solely for the welfare of 
Russia. In Prince Andrew's eyes Sperdnski was 
the man he would himself have wished to be 
one who explained all the facts of life reason- 
ably, considered important only what was ra- 
tional, and was capable of applying the stand- 
ard of reason to everything. Every thing seemed 
so simple and clear in Sperdnski's exposition 
that Prince Andrew involuntarily agreed with 
him about everything. If he replied and ar- 
gued, it was only because he wished to main- 
tain his independence and not submit to Spe- 
rdnski's opinions entirely. Everything was right 
and everything was as it should be: only one 
thing disconcerted Prince Andrew. This was 
Sperdnski's cold, mirrorlike look, which did 
not allow one to penetrate to his soul, and his 
delicate white hands, which Prince Andrew 
involuntarily watched as one does watch the 
hands of those who possess power. This mirror- 
like gaze and those delicate hands irritated 
Prince Andrew, he knew not why. He was un- 
pleasantly struck, too, by the excessive con- 
tempt for others that he observed in Sperdnski, 
and by the diversity of lines of argument he 
used to support his opinions. He made use of 
every kind of mental device, except analogy, 
and passed too boldly, it seemed to Prince An- 
drew, from one to another. Now he would take 
up the position of a practical man and con- 
demn dreamers; now that of a satirist, and 
laugh ironically at his opponents; now grow 
severely logical, or suddenly rise to the realm 
of metaphysics. (This last resource was one he 
very frequently employed.) He would transfer 
a question to metaphysical heights, pass on to 
definitions of space, time, and thought, and, 
having deduced the refutation he needed, 
would again descend to the level of the origi- 
nal discussion. 

In general the trait of Sperdnski's mentality 
which struck Prince Andrew most was his ab- 
solute and unshakable belief in the power and 
authority of reason. It was evident that the 
thought could never occur to him which to 
Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that 
it is after all impossible to express all one 
thinks; and that he had never felt the doubt, 
"Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" And 
it was just this peculiarity of Sperdnski's mind 
that particularly attracted Prince Andrew. 



During the first period of their acquaintance 
Bolk6nski felt a passionate admiration for him 
similar to that which he had once felt for 
Bonaparte. The fact that Sperdnski was the 
son of a village priest, and that stupid people 
might meanly despise him on account of his 
humble origin (as in fact many did), caused 
Prince Andrew to cherish his sentiment for 
him the more, and unconsciously to strengthen 
it. 

On that first evening Bolk6nski spent with 
him, having mentioned the Commission for the 
Revision of the Code of Laws, Sperdnski told 
him sarcastically that the Commission had ex- 
isted for a hundred and fifty years, had cost 
millions, and had done nothing except that 
Rosenkampf had stuck labels on the corre- 
sponding paragraphs of the different codes. 

"And that is all the state has for the millions 
it has spent," said he. "We want to give the 
Senate new juridical powers, but we have no 
laws. That is why it is a sin for men like you, 
Prince, not to serve in these times!" 

Prince Andrew said that for that work an 
education in jurisprudence was needed which 
he did not possess. 

"But nobody possesses it, so what would you 
have? It is a vicious circle from which we must 
break a way out." 

A week later Prince Andrew was a member 
of the Committee on Army Regulations and 
what he had not at all expected was chairman 
of a section of the committee for the revision 
of the laws. At Sperdnski's request he took the 
first part of the Civil Code that was being 
drawn up and, with the aid of the Code Napo- 
teon and the Institutes of Justinian, he worked 
at formulating the section on Personal Rights. 

CHAPTER VII 

NEARLY TWO YEARS before this, in 1808, Pierre 
on returning to Petersburg after visiting his 
estates had involuntarily found himself in a 
leading position among the Petersburg Free- 
masons. He arranged dining and funeral lodge 
meetings, enrolled new members, and busied 
himself uniting various lodges and acquiring 
authentic charters. He gave money for the 
erection of temples and supplemented as far 
as he could the collection of alms, in regard to 
which the majority of members were stingy 
and irregular. He supported almost single- 
handed a poor house the order had founded in 
Petersburg. 

His life meanwhile continued as before, with 
the same infatuations and dissipations. He 



244 WAR AND PEACE 

liked to dine and drink well, and though he 
considered it immoral and humiliating could 
not resist the temptations of the bachelor cir- 
cles in which he moved. 

Amid the turmoil of his activities and dis- 
tractions, however, Pierre at the end of a year 
began to feel that the more firmly he tried to 
rest upon it, the more Masonic ground on 
which he stood gave way under him. At the 
same time he felt that the deeper the ground 
sank under him the closer bound he involun- 
tarily became to the order. When he had joined 
the Freemasons he had experienced the feel- 
ing of one who confidently steps onto the 
smooth surface of a bog. When he put his foot 
down it sank in. To make quite sure of the 
firmness of the ground, he put his other foot 
down and sank deeper still, became stuck in 
it, and involuntarily waded knee-deep in the 

bog- 
Joseph Alex^evich was not in Petersburg- 
he had of late stood aside from the affairs of 
"the Petersburg lodges and lived almost entirely 
in Moscow. All the members of the lodges 
were men Pierre knew in ordinary life, and it 
was difficult for him to regard them merely as 
Brothers in Freemasonry and not as Prince B. 
or Ivdn Vasilevich D., whom he knew in soci- 
ety mostly as weak and insignificant men. Un- 
der the Masonic aprons and insignia he saw 
the uniforms and decorations at which they 
aimed in ordinary life. Often after collecting 
alms, and reckoning up twenty to thirty rubles 
received for the most part in promises from a 
dozen members, of whom half were as well able 
to pay as himself, Pierre remembered the 
Masonic vow in which each Brother promised 
to devote all his belongings to his neighbor, 
and doubts on which he tried not to dwell 
arose in his soul. 

He divided the Brothers he knew into four 
categories. In the first he put those who did 
not take an active part in the affairs of the 
lodges or in human affairs, but were exclusive- 
ly occupied with the mystical science of the or- 
der: with questions of the threefold designa- 
tion of God, the three primordial elements- 
sulphur, mercury, and salt or the meaning of 
the square and all the various figures of the 
temple of Solomon. Pierre respected this class 
of Brothers to which the elder ones chiefly be- 
longed, including, Pierre thought, Joseph 
Alexevich himself, but he did not share their 
interests. His heart was not in the mystical as- 
pect of Freemasonry. 
In the second category Pierre reckoned him- 



self and others like him, seeking and vacillat- 
ing, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a 
straight and comprehensible path, but hoped 
to do so. 

In the third category he included those 
Brothers (the majority) who saw nothing in 
Freemasonry but the external forms and cere- 
monies, and prized the strict performance of 
these forms without troubling about their pur- 
port or significance. Such were Willarski and 
even the Grand Master of the principal lodge. 

Finally, to the fourth category also a great 
many Brothers belonged, particularly those 
who had lately joined. These according to 
Pierre's observations were men who had no be- 
lief in anything, nor desire for anything, but 
joined the Freemasons merely to associate with 
the wealthy young Brothers who were influ- 
ential through their connections or rank, and 
of whom there were very many in the lodge. 

Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he 
was doing. Freemasonry, at any rate as he saw 
it here, sometimes seemed to him based merely 
on externals. He did not think of doubting 
Freemasonry itself, but suspected that Russian 
Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated 
from its original principles. And so toward the 
end of the year he went abroad to be initiated 
into the higher secrets of the order. 

In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to 
Petersburg. Our Freemasons knew from cor- 
respondence with those abroad that Beziikhov 
had obtained the confidence of many highly 
placed persons, had been initiated into many 
mysteries, had been raised to a higher grade, 
and was bringing back with him much that 
might conduce to the advantage of the Mason- 
ic cause in Russia. The Petersburg Freemasons 
all came to see him, tried to ingratiate them- 
selves with him, and it seemed to them all that 
he was preparing something for them and con- 
cealing it. 

A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second 
degree was convened, at which Pierre promised 
to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers 
what he had to deliver to them from the high- 
est leaders of their order. The meeting was a 
full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierre 
rose and began his address. 

"Dear Brothers," he began, blushing and 
stammering, with a written speech in his hand, 
"it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries in 
the seclusion of our lodge we must act act! 
We are drowsing, but we must act." Pierre 
raised his notebook and began to read. 

"For the dissemination of pure truth and to 



BOOK SIX 



245 



secure the triumph of virtue," he read, "we 
must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse prin- 
ciples in harmony with the spirit of the times, 
undertake the education of the young, unite 
ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the wisest 
men, boldly yet prudently overcome supersti- 
tions, infidelity, and folly, and form of those 
devoted to us a body linked together by unity 
of purpose and possessed of authority and 
power. 

"To attain this end we must secure a pre- 
ponderance of virtue over vice and must en- 
deavor to secure that the honest man may, 
even in this world, receive a lasting reward for 
his virtue. But in these great endeavors we are 
gravely hampered by the political institutions 
of today. What is to be done in these circum- 
stances? To favor revolutions, overthrow every- 
thing, repel force by force? . . . No I We are very 
far from that. Every violent reform deserves 
censure, for it quite fails to remedy evil while 
men remain what they are, and also because 
wisdom needs no violence. 

"The whole plan of our order should be 
based on the idea of preparing men of firm- 
ness and virtue bound together by unity of 
conviction aiming at the punishment of vice 
and folly, and patronizing talent and virtue: 
raising worthy men from the dust and attach- 
ing them to our Brotherhood. Only then will 
our order have the power unobtrusively to 
bind the hands of the protectors of disorder 
and to control them without their being aware 
of it. In a word, we must found a form of gov- 
ernment holding universal sway, which should 
be diffused over the whole world without de- 
stroying the bonds of citizenship, and beside 
which all other governments can continue in 
their customary course and do everything ex- 
cept what impedes the great aim of our order, 
which is to obtain for virtue the victory over 
vice. This aim was that of Christianity itself. 
It taught men to be wise and good and for 
their own benefit to follow the example and 
instruction of the best and wisest men. 

"At that time, when everything was plunged 
in darkness, preaching alone was of course suf- 
ficient. The novelty of Truth endowed her 
with special strength, but now we need much 
more powerful methods. It is now necessary 
that man, governed by his senses, should find 
in virtue a charm palpable to those senses. It 
is impossible to eradicate the passions; but we 
must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and 
it is therefore necessary that everyone should 
be able to satisfy his passions within the limits 



of virtue. Our order should provide means to 
that end. 

"As soon as we have a certain number of 
worthy men in every state, each of them again 
training two others and all being closely united, 
everything will be possible for our order, 
which has already in secret accomplished much 
for the welfare of mankind." 

This speech not only made a strong impres- 
sion, but created excitement in the lodge. The 
majority of the Brothers, seeing in it dangerous 
designs of Illuminism, 1 met it with a coldness 
that surprised Pierre. The Grand Master be- 
gan answering him, and Pierre began develop- 
ing his views with more and more warmth. It 
was long since there had been so stormy a meet- 
ing. Parties were formed, some accusing Pierre 
of Illuminism, others supporting him. At that 
meeting l&gt;e was struck for the first time by the 
endless variety of men's minds, which prevents 
a truth from ever presenting itself identically 
to two persons. Even those members who 
seemed to be on his side understood him in 
their own way with limitations and alterations 
he could not agree to, as what he always wanted 
most was to convey his thought to others just 
as he himself understood it. 

At the end of the meeting the Grand Master 
with irony and ill-will reproved Bezukhov for 
his vehemence and said it was not love of vir- 
tue alone, but also a love of strife that had 
moved him in the dispute. Pierre did not an- 
swer him and asked briefly whether his pro- 
posal would be accepted. He was told that it 
would not, and without waiting for the usual 
formalities he left the lodge and went home. 

CHAPTER VIII 

AGAIN PIERRE was overtaken by the depression 
he so dreaded. For three days after the delivery 
of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at 
home receiving no one and going nowhere. 

It was just then that he received a letter from 
"his wife, who implored him to see her, telling 
him how grieved she was about him and how 
she wished to devote her whole life to him. 

At the end of the letter she informed him 
that in a few days she would return to Peters- 
burg from abroad. 

Following this letter one of the Masonic 
Brothers whom Pierre respected less than the 
others forced his way in to see him and, turn- 
ing the conversation upon Pierre's matrimoni- 
al affairs, by way of fraternal advice expressed 

1 The Illuminati sought to substitute republican 
for monarchical institutions. 



WAR AND PEACE 



the opinion that his severity to his wife was 
wrong and that he was neglecting one of the 
first rules of Freemasonry by not forgiving the 
penitent. 

At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince 
Vasfli's wife, sent to him imploring him to 
come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most 
important matter. Pierre saw that there was a 
conspiracy against him and that they wanted 
to reunite him with his wife, and in the mood 
he then was, this was not even unpleasant to 
him. Nothing mattered to him. Nothing in life 
seemed to him of much importance, and un- 
der the influence of the depression that pos- 
sessed him he valued neither his liberty nor his 
resolution to punish his wife. 

"No one is right and no one is to blame; so 
she too is not to blame," he thought. 

If he did not at once give his consent to a 
reunion with his wife, it was only because in 
his state of depression he did not feel able to 
take any step. Had his wife come to him, he 
would not have turned her away. Compared to 
what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of 
indifference whether he lived with his wife or 
not? 

Without replying either to his wife or his 
mother-in-law, Pierre late one night prepared 
for a journey and started for Moscow to see 
Joseph Alex^evich. This is what he noted in 
his diary: 

Moscow, ijth November 

I have just returned from my benefactor, and 
hasten to write down what I have experienced. 
Joseph Alexevich is living poorly and has for 
three years been suffering from a painful disease 
of the bladder. No one has ever heard him utter a 
groan or a word of complaint. From morning till 
late at night, except when he eats his very plain 
food, he is working at science. He received me 
graciously and made me sit down on the bed on 
which he lay. I made the sign of the Knights of 
the East and of Jerusalem, and he responded in 
the same manner, asking me with a mild smile 
what I had learned and gained in the Prussian 
and Scottish lodges. I told him everything as best 
I could, and told him what I had proposed to our 
Petersburg lodge, of the bad reception I had en- 
countered, and of my rupture with the Brothers. 
Joseph Alexdevich, having remained silent and 
thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of 
the matter, which at once lit up for me my whole 
past and the future path I should follow. He sur- 
prised me by asking whether I remembered the 
threefold aim of the order: (i) The preservation 
and study of the mystery, (a) The purification and 
reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) 
The improvement of the human race by striving 



for such purification. Which is the principal aim 
of these three? Certainly self-reformation and self- 
purification. Only to this aim can we always strive 
independently of circumstances. But at the same 
time just this aim demands the greatest efforts of 
us; and so, led astray by pride, losing sight of this 
aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery 
which in our impurity we are unworthy to receive, 
or seek the reformation of the human race while 
ourselves setting an example of baseness and prof- 
ligacy. Ilium inism is not a pure doctrine, just be- 
cause it is attracted by social activity and puffed 
up by pride. On this ground Joseph Alexevich 
condemned my speech and my whole activity, and 
in the depth of my soul I agreed with him. Talk- 
ing of my family affairs he said to me, "the chief 
duty of a true Mason, as I have told you, lies in 
perfecting himself. We often think that by remov- 
ing all the difficulties of our life we shall more 
quickly reach our aim, but on the contrary, my 
dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that 
we can attain our three chief aims: (i) Self-knowl- 
edgefor man can only know himself by compari- 
son, (2) Self-perfecting, which can only be attained 
by conflict, and (3) The attainment of the chief 
virtue love of death. Only the vicissitudes of life 
can show us its vanity and develop our innate love 
of death or of rebirth to a new life." These words 
are all the more remarkable because, in spite of 
his great physical sufferings, Joseph Alexeevich is 
never weary of life though he loves death, for 
which in spite of the purity and loftiness of his 
inner man he does not yet feel himself sufficiently 
prepared. My benefactor then explained to me 
fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation 
and pointed out to me that the numbers three and 
seven are the basis of everything. He advised me 
not to avoid intercourse with the Petersburg 
Brothers, but to take up only second-grade posts in 
the lodge, to try, while diverting the Brothers 
from pride, to turn them toward the true path of 
self-knowledge and self-perfecting. Besides this he 
advised me for myself personally above all to keep 
a watch over myself, and to that end he gave me 
a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in 
which I will in future note down all my actions. 

Petersburg, 2}rd November 

I am again living with my wife. My mother-in- 
law came to me in tears and said that Helene was 
here and that she implored me to hear her; that 
she was innocent and unhappy at my desertion, 
and much more. I knew that if I once let myself 
see her I should not have strength to go on refus- 
ing what she wanted. In my perplexity I did not 
know whose aid and advice to seek. Had my bene- 
factor been here he would have told me what to 
do. I went to my room and reread Joseph Alexe- 
vich's letters and recalled my conversations with 
him, and deduced from it all that I ought not to 
refuse a suppliant, and ought to reach a helping 
hand to everyone especially to one so closely 



bound to me and that I must bear my cross. 
But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right, 
then let union with her have only a spiritual aim. 
That is what I decided, and what I wrote to Joseph 
Alexe"evich. I told my wife that I begged her to 
forget the past, to forgive me whatever wrong I 
may have done her, and that I had nothing to for- 
give. It gave me joy to tell her this. She need not 
know how hard it was for me to see her again. I 
have settled on the upper floor of this big house 
and am experiencing a happy feeling of regenera- 
tion. 

CHAPTER IX 

AT THAT TIME, as always happens, the highest 
society that met at court and at the grand balls 
was divided into several circles, each with its 
own particular tone. The largest of these was 
the French circle of the Napoleonic alliance, 
the circle of Count Rumydntsev and Caulain- 
court. In this group HeUene, as soon as she had 
settled in Petersburg with her husband, took a 
very prominent place. She was visited by the 
members of the French embassy and by many 
belonging to that circle and noted for their in- 
tellect and polished manners. 

Hellene had been at Erfurt during the fa- 
mous meeting of the Emperors and had brought 
from there these connections with the Napole- 
onic notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been 
brilliant. Napoleon himself had noticed her in 
the theater and said of her: "C'est un superbe 
animal." l Her success as a beautiful and ele- 
gant woman did not surprise Pierre, for she 
had become even handsomer than before. What 
did surprise him was that during these last two 
years his wife had succeeded in gaining the 
reputation "d' une femme charmante, aussi 
spirituelle que belle." 3 The distinguished 
Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-page letters. 
Bilibin saved up his epigrams to produce them 
in Countess Bezukhova's presence. To be re- 
ceived in the Countess Bezukhova's salon was 
regarded as a diploma of intellect Young men 
read books before attending Hlne's evenings, 
to have something to say in her salon, and 
secretaries of the embassy, and even ambassa- 
dors, confided diplomatic secrets to her, so that 
in a way Hdene was a power. Pierre, who knew 
she was very stupid, sometimes attended, with 
a strange feeling of perplexity and fear, her 
evenings and dinner parties, where politics, 
poetry, and philosophy were discussed. At these 
parties his feelings were like those of a con- 

1 "That's a superb animal." 
""Of a charming woman, as witty as she is 
lovely." 



BOOK SIX 247 

juror who always expects his trick to be found 



out at any moment. But whether because stu- 
pidity was just what was needed to run such a 
salon, or because those who were deceived 
found pleasure in the deception, at any rate it 
remained unexposed and Hlene Bezukhova's 
reputation as a lovely and clever woman be- 
came so firmly established that she could say 
the emptiest and stupidest things andyet every- 
body would go into raptures over every word 
of hers and look for a profound meaning in it 
of which she herself had no conception. 

Pierre was just the husband needed for a 
brilliant society woman. He was that absent- 
minded crank, a grand seigneur husband who 
was in no one's way, and far from spoiling the 
high tone and general impression of the draw- 
ing room, he served, by the contrast he pre- 
sented to her, as an advantageous background 
to his elegant and tactful wife. Pierre during 
the last two years, as a result of his continual 
absorption in abstract interests and his sincere 
contempt for all else, had acquired in his wife's 
circle, which did not interest him, that air of 
unconcern, indifference, and benevolence to- 
ward all, which cannot be acquired artificially 
and therefore inspires involuntary respect. He 
entered his wife's drawing room as one enters 
a theater, was acquainted with everybody, 
equally pleased to see everyone, and equally in- 
different to them all. Sometimes he joined in a 
conversation which interested him and, regard- 
less of whether any "gentlemen of the embassy" 
were present or not, lispingly expressed his 
views, which were sometimes not at all in ac- 
cord with the accepted tone of the moment. 
But the general opinion concerning the queer 
husband of "the most distinguished woman in 
Petersburg" was so well established that no 
one took his freaks seriously. 

Among the many young men who frequented 
her house every day, Boris Drubetsk6y, who had 
already achieved great success in the service, 
was the most intimate friend of the Bezukhov 
household since Hlne's return from Erfurt. 
Hlene spoke of him as "mon page" and 
treated him like a child. Her smile for him was 
the same as for everybody, but sometimes that 
smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him 
Boris behaved with a particularly dignified and 
sad deference. This shade of deference also dis- 
turbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully 
three years before from the mortification to 
which his wife had subjected him that he now 
protected himself from the danger of its repeti- 
tion, first by not being a husband to his wife, 



WAR AND PEACE 



and secondly by not allowing himself to sus- 
pect. 

"No, now that she has become a bluestock- 
ing she has finally renounced her former in- 
fatuations," he told himself. "There has never 
been an instance of a bluestocking being car- 
ried away by affairs of the heart"a statement 
which, though gathered from an unknown 
source, he believed implicitly. Yet strange to 
say Borfs' presence in his wife's drawing room 
(and he was almost always there) had a physi- 
cal effect upon Pierre; it constricted his limbs 
and destroyed the unconsciousness and free- 
dom of his movements. 

"What a strange antipathy," thought Pierre, 
"yet I used to like him very much." 

In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great 
gentleman, the rather blind and absurd hus- 
band of a distinguished wife, a clever crank 
who did nothing but harmed nobody and was 
a first-rate, good-natured fellow. But a com- 
plex and difficult process of internal develop- 
ment was taking place all this time in Pierre's 
soul, revealing much to him and causing him 
many spiritual doubts and joys. 

CHAPTER X 

PIERRE WENT ON with his diary, and this is what 
he wrote in it during that time: 
November 



Got up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went 
to my duties. [By Joseph Alexevich's advice Pierre 
had entered the service of the state and served on 
one of the committees.] Returned home for dinner 
and dined alone the countess had many visitors 
I do not like. I ate and drank moderately and after 
dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers. 
In the evening I went down to the countess and 
told a funny story about B., and only remembered 
that I ought not to have done so when everybody 
laughed loudly at it. 

I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil 
mind. Great God, help me to walk in Thy paths, 
(i) to conquer anger by calmness and delibera- 
tion, (2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and re- 
pulsion, (3) to withdraw from worldliness, but not 
avoid (a) the service of the state, (b) family du- 
ties, (c) relations with my friends, and (d) the 
management of my affairs. 

2jth November 

I got up late. On waking I lay long in bed yield- 
ing to sloth. O God, help and strengthen me that I 
may walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures, but 
without proper feeling. Brother Uriisov came and 
we talked about worldly vanities. He told me of 
the Emperor's new projects. I began to criticize 
them, but remembered my rules and my benefac- 
tor's wordsthat a true Freemason should be a 



zealous worker for the state when his aid is re- 
quired and a quiet onlooker when not called on 
to assist. My tongue is my enemy. Brothers G. V. 
and O. visited me and we had a preliminary talk 
about the reception of a new Brother. They laid 
on me the duty of Rhetor. I feel myself weak and 
unworthy. Then our talk turned to the interpre- 
tation of the seven pillars and steps of the Tem- 
ple, the seven sciences, the seven virtues, the seven 
vices, and the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. 
Brother O. was very eloquent. In the evening the 
admission took place. The new decoration of the 
premises contributed much to the magnificence of 
the spectacle. It was Borfs Drubetskoy who was ad- 
mitted. I nominated him and was the Rhetor. A 
strange feeling agitated me all the time I was 
alone with him in the dark chamber. I caught my- 
self harboring a feeling of hatred toward him 
which I vainly tried to overcome. That is why I 
should really like to save him from evil and lead 
him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts of 
him did not leave me. It seemed to me that his ob- 
ject in entering the Brotherhood was merely to be 
intimate and in favor with members of our lodge. 
Apart from the fact that he had asked me several 
times whether N. and S. were members of our 
lodge (a question to which I could not reply) and 
that according to my observation he is incapable 
of feeling respect for our holy order and is too pre- 
occupied and satisfied with the outer man to de- 
sire spiritual improvement, I had no cause to 
doubt him, but he seemed to me insincere, and all 
the time I stood alone with him in the dark tem- 
ple it seemed to me that he was smiling con- 
temptuously at my words, and I wished really to 
stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it. I 
could not be eloquent, nor could I frankly men- 
tion my doubts to the Brothers and to the Grand 
Master. Great Architect of Nature, help me to find 
the true path out of the labyrinth of lies! 

After this, three pages were left blank in the 
diary, and then the following was written: 

I have had a long and instructive talk alone with 
Brother V.,who advised me to hold fast by Brother 
A. Though I am unworthy, much was revealed to 
me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. 
Elohim is the name of the ruler of all. The third 
name is the name unutterable which means the 
All. Talks with Brother V. strengthen, refresh, and 
support me in the path of virtue. In his presence 
doubt has no place. The distinction between the 
poor teachings of mundane science and our sa- 
cred all-embracing teaching is clear to me. Human 
sciences dissect everything to comprehend it, and 
kill everything to examine it. In the holy science 
of our order all is one, all is known in its entirety 
and life. The Trinity-the three elements of mat- 
terare sulphur, mercury, and salt. Sulphur is of 
an oily and fiery nature; in combination with salt 
by its fiery nature it arouses a desire in the latter 
by means of which it attracts mercury, seizes it, 



BOOK SIX 



holds it, and in combination produces other bod- 
ies. Mercury is a fluid, volatile, spiritual essence. 
Christ, the Holy Spirit, HimI . . . 

3rd December 

Awoke late, read the Scriptures but was apa- 
thetic. Afterwards went and paced up and down 
the large hall. I wished to meditate, but instead 
my imagination pictured an occurrence of four 
years ago, when D61okhov, meeting me in Moscow 
after our duel, said he hoped I was enjoying per- 
fect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. 
At the time I gave him no answer. Now I recalled 
every detail of that meeting and in my mind gave 
him the most malevolent and bitter replies. I rec- 
ollected myself and drove away that thought only 
when I found myself glowing with anger, but I did 
not sufficiently repent. Afterwards Boris Drubet- 
sk6y came and began relating various adventures. 
His coming vexed me from the first, and I said 
something disagreeable to him. He replied. I flared 
up and said much that was unpleasant and even 
rude to him. He became silent, and I recollected 
myself only when it was too late. My God, I can- 
not get on with him at all. The cause of this is my 
egotism. I set myself above him and so become 
much worse than he, for he is lenient to my rude- 
ness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for 
him. O God, grant that in his presence I may 
rather see my own vileness, and behave so that he 
too may benefit. After dinner I fell asleep and as 
I was drowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in 
my left ear, "Thy day!" 

I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and 
was suddenly surrounded by dogs, but I went on 
undismayed. Suddenly a smallish dog seized my 
left thigh with its teeth and would not let go. I 
began to throttle it with my hands. Scarcely had I 
torn it off before another, a bigger one, began bit- 
ing me. I lifted it up, but the higher I lifted it the 
bigger and heavier it grew. And suddenly Brother 
A. came and, taking my arm, led me to a building 
to enter which we had to pass along a narrow 
plank. I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way 
and I began to clamber up a fence which I could 
scarcely reach with my hands. After much effort I 
dragged myself up, so that my legs hung down on 
one side and my body on the other. I looked round 
and saw Brother A. standing on the fence and 
pointing me to a broad avenue and garden, and in 
the garden was a large and beautiful building. I 
woke up. O Lord, great Architect of Nature, help 
me to tear from myself these dogs my passions 
especially the last, which unites in itself the 
strength of all the former ones, and aid me to 
enter that temple of virtue to a vision of which I 
attained in my dream. 

7th December 

I dreamed that Joseph Alexevich was sitting in 
my house, and that I was very glad and wished to 
entertain him. It seemed as if I chattered inces- 



santly with other people and suddenly remem- 
bered that this could not please him, and I wished 
to come close to him and embrace him. But as 
soon as I drew near I saw that his face had changed 
and grown young, and he was quietly telling me 
something about the teaching of our order, but 
so softly that I could not hear it. Then it seemed 
that we all left the room and something strange 
happened. We were sitting or lying on the floor. 
He was telling me something, and I wished to 
show him my sensibility, and not listening to 
what he was saying I began picturing to myself the 
condition of my inner man and the grace of God 
sanctifying me. And tears came into my eyes, and 
I was glad he noticed this. But he looked at me 
with vexation and jumped up, breaking off his re- 
marks. I felt abashed and asked whether what he 
had been saying did not concern me; but he did 
not reply, gave me a kind look, and then we sud- 
denly found ourselves in my bedroom where there 
is a double bed. He lay down on the edge of it and 
I burned with longing to caress him and lie down 
too. And he said, "Tell me frankly what is your 
chief temptation? Do you know it? I think you 
know it already." Abashed by this question, I re- 
plied that sloth was my chief temptation. He 
shook his head incredulously; and even more 
abashed, I said that though I was living with my 
wife as he advised, I was not living with her as her 
husband. To this he replied that one should not 
deprive a wife of one's embraces and gave me to 
understand that that was my duty. But I replied 
that I should be ashamed to do it, and suddenly 
everything vanished. And I awoke and found in 
my mind the text from the Gospel: "The life was 
the light of men. And the light shineth in dark- 
ness; and the darkness comprehended it not." 
Joseph Alexevich's face had looked young and 
bright. That day I received a letter from my bene- 
factor in which he wrote about "conjugal duties." 

9th December 

I had a dream from which I awoke with a throb- 
bing heart. I saw that I was in Moscow in my house, 
in the big sitting room, and Joseph Alexevich 
came in from the drawing room. I seemed to know 
at once that the process of regeneration had al- 
ready taken place in him, and I rushed to meet 
him. I embraced him and kissed his hands, and 
he said, "Hast thou noticed that my face is dif- 
ferent?" I looked at him, still holding him in my 
arms, and saw that his face was young, but that 
he had no hair on his head and his features were 
quite changed. And I said, "I should have known 
you had I met you by chance," and I thought to 
myself, "Am I telling the truth?" And suddenly I 
saw him lying like a dead body; then he gradually 
recovered and went with me into my study carry- 
ing a large book of sheets of drawing paper; I 
said, "I drew that," and he answered by bowing 
his head. I opened the book, and on all the pages 
there were excellent drawings. And in my dream 



250 



WAR AND PEACE 



I knew that these drawings represented the love 
adventures of the soul with its beloved. And on its 
pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden 
in transparent garments and with a transparent 
body, flying up to the clouds. And I seemed to 
know that this maiden was nothing else than a 
representation of the Song of Songs. And looking 
at those drawings I dreamed I felt that I was do- 
ing wrong, but could not tear myself away from 
them. Lord, help mel My God, if Thy forsaking 
me is Thy doing, Thy will be done; but if I am 
myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I 
shall perish of my debauchery if Thou utterly de- 
sertest me! 



CHAPTER XI 

THE Rosx6vs' MONETARY AFFAIRS had not im- 
proved during the two years they had spent in 
the country. 

Though Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to 
his resolution and was still serving modestly in 
an obscure regiment, spending comparatively 
little, the way of life at Otradnoe Mftenka's 
management of affairs, in particular was such 
that the debts inevitably increased every year. 
The only resource obviously presenting itself 
to the old count was to apply for an official 
post, so he had come to Petersburg to look for 
one and also, as he said, to let the lassies enjoy 
themselves for the last time. 

Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg 
proposed to Ve*ra and was accepted. 

Though in Moscow the Rostovs belonged to 
the best society without themselves giving it a 
thought, yet in Petersburg their circle of ac- 
quaintances was a mixed and indefinite one. 
In Petersburg they were provincials, and the 
very people they had entertained in Moscow 
without inquiring to what set they belonged, 
here looked down on them. 

The Rost6vs lived in the same hospitable 
way in Petersburg as in Moscow, and the most 
diverse people met at their suppers. Country 
neighbors from Otradnoe, impoverished old 
squires and their daughters, Per6nskaya a maid 
of honor, Pierre Beziikhov, arid the son of their 
district postmaster who had obtained a post in 
Petersburg. Among the men who very soon be- 
came frequent visitors at the Rost6vs' house in 
Petersburg were Boris, Pierre whom the count 
had met in the street and dragged home with 
him, and Berg who spent whole days at the 
Rost6vs' and paid the eldest daughter, Count- 
ess Ve'ra, the attentions a young man pays when 
he intends to propose. 

Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his 
right hand wounded at Austerlitz and held a 



perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. He nar 
rated that episode so persistently and with st\ 
important an air that everyone believed in the 
merit and usefulness of his deed, and he had 
obtained two decorations for Austerlitz. 

In the Finnish war he also managed to dis- 
tinguish himself. He had picked up the scrap 
of a grenade that had killed an aide-de-camp 
standing near the commander in chief and had 
taken it to his commander. Just as he had done 
after Austerlitz, he related this occurrence at 
such length and so insistently that everyone 
again believed it had been necessary to do this, 
and he received two decorations for the Fin- 
nish war also. In 1809 he was a captain in the 
Guards, wore medals, and held some special 
lucrative posts in Petersburg. 

Though some skeptics smiled when told of 
Berg's merits, it could not be denied that he 
was a painstaking and brave officer, on excel- 
lent terms with his superiors, and a moral 
young man with a brilliant career before him 
and an assured position in society. 

Four years before, meeting a German com- 
rade in the stalls of a Moscow theater, Berg 
had pointed out Ve'ra Rost6va to him and had 
said in German, "das soil mein Weib werden," 1 
and from that moment had made up his mind 
to marry her. Now in Petersburg, having con- 
sidered the Rost6vs' position and his own, he 
decided that the time had come to propose. 

Berg's proposal was at first received with a 
perplexity that was not flattering to him. At 
first it seemed strange that the son of an ob- 
scure Livonian gentleman should propose mar- 
riage to a Countess Rost6va; but Berg's chief 
characteristic was such a naive and goocl- 
natured egotism that the Rost6vs involuntarily 
came to think it would be a good thing, since 
he himself was so firmly convinced that it was 
good, indeed excellent. Moreover, the Rostovs' 
affairs were seriously embarrassed, as the suitor 
could not but know; and above all, Ve'ra was 
twenty-four, had been taken out everywhere, 
and though she was certainly good-looking and 
sensible, no one up to now had proposed to 
her. So they gave their consent. 

"You see," said Berg to his comrade, whom 
he called "friend" only because he knew that 
everyone has friends, "you see, I have consid- 
ered it all, and should not marry if I had not 
thought it all out or if it were in any way un- 
suitable. But on the contrary, my papa and 
mamma are now provided for I have arranged 
that rent for them in the Baltic Provincesand 

1 "That girl shall be my wife." 



I can live in Petersburg on my pay, and with 
her fortune and my good management we can 
get along nicely. I am not marrying for money 
I consider that dishonorablebut a wife 
should bring her share and a husband his. I 
have my position in the service, she has con- 
nections and some means. In our times that is 
worth something, isn't it? But above all, she is 
a handsome, estimable girl, and she loves 
me. . . ." 

Berg blushed and smiled. 

"And I love her, because her character is 
sensible and very good. Now the other sister, 
though they are the same family, is quite dif- 
ferentan unpleasant character and has not 
the same intelligence. She is so ... you know? 
. . . Unpleasant . . . But my fiancee! . . . Well, 
you will be coming," he was going to say, "to 
dine," but changed his mind and said, "to take 
tea with us," and quickly doubling up his 
tongue he blew a small round ring of tobacco 
smoke, perfectly embodying his dream of hap- 
piness. 

After the first feeling of perplexity aroused 
in the parents by Berg's proposal, the holiday 
tone of joyousness usual at such times took pos- 
session of the family, but the rejoicing was ex- 
ternal and insincere. In the family's feeling to- 
ward this wedding a certain awkwardness and 
constraint was evident, as if they were ashamed 
of not having loved Ve*ra sufficiently and of be- 
ing so ready to get her off their hands. The old 
count felt this most. He would probably have 
been unable to state the cause of his embarrass- 
ment, but it resulted from the state of his af- 
fairs. He did not know at all how much he had, 
what his debts amounted to, or what dowry he 
could give V6ra. When his daughters were 
born he had assigned to each of them, for her 
dowry, an estate with three hundred serfs; but 
one of these estates had already been sold, and 
the other was mortgaged and the interest so 
much in arrears that it would have to be sold, 
so that it was impossible to give it to Vera. Nor 
had he any money. 

Berg had already been engaged a month, 
and only a week remained before the wedding, 
but the count had not yet decided in his own 
mind the question of the dowry, nor spoken to 
hiswifeabout it. Atone time the count thought 
of giving her the Ryazan estate or of selling a 
forest, at another time of borrowing money on 
a note of hand. A few days before the wedding 
Berg entered the count's study early one morn- 
ing and, with a pleasant smile, respectfully 
asked his future father-in-law to let him know 



BOOK SIX 251 

what Wra's dowry would be. The count was so 



disconcerted by this long-foreseen inquiry that 
without consideration he gave the first reply 
that came into his head. "I like your being busi- 
nesslike about it. ... I like it. You shall be 
satisfied. . . ." 

And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up, 
wishing to end the conversation. But Berg, 
smiling pleasantly, explained that if he did not 
know for certain how much Vra would have 
and did not receive at least part of the dowry in 
advance, he would have to break matters off. 

"Because, consider, Count if I allowed my- 
self to marry now without having definite 
means to maintain my wife, I should be acting 
badly " 

The conversation ended by the count, who 
wished to be generous and to avoid further im- 
portunity, saying that he would give a note of 
hand for eighty thousand rubles. Berg smiled 
meekly, kissed the count on the shoulder, and 
said that he was very grateful, but that it was 
impossible for him to arrange his new life with- 
out receiving thirty thousand in ready money. 
"Or at least twenty thousand, Count," he added, 
"and then a note of hand for only sixty thou- 
sand." 

"Yes, yes, all rightl" said the count hurried- 
ly. "Only excuse me, my dear fellow, I'll give 
you twenty thousand and a note of hand for 
eighty thousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me." 

CHAPTER XII 

NATASHA WAS SIXTEEN and it was the year 1809, 
the very year to which she had counted on her 
fingers with Boris after they had kissed four 
years ago. Since then she had not seen him. Be- 
fore S6nya and her mother, if Boris happened 
to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of that 
episode as of some childish, long-forgotten mat- 
ter that was not worth mentioning. But in the 
secret depths of her soul the question whether 
her engagement to Boris was a jest or an im- 
portant, binding promise tormented her. 

Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the 
army he had not seen the Rostovs. He had been 
in Moscow several times, and had passed near 
Otradnoe, but had never been to see them. 

Sometimes it occurred to Natdsha that he did 
not wish to see her, and this conjecture was 
confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders 
spoke of him. 

"Nowadays old friends are not remembered," 
the countess would say when Borfs was men- 
tioned. 

Anna Mikhaylovna also had of late visited 



252 



WAR AND PEACE 



them less frequently, seemed to hold herself 
with particular dignity, and always spoke rap- 
turously and gratefully of the merits of her son 
and the brilliant career on which he had en- 
tered. When the Rost6vs came to Petersburg 
Boris called on them. 

He drove to their house in some agitation. 
The memory of Natasha was his most poetic 
recollection. But he went with the firm inten- 
tion of letting her and her parents feel that the 
childish relations between himself and Natasha 
could not be binding either on her or on him. 
He had a brilliant position in society thanks to 
his intimacy with Countess Bezukhova, a bril- 
liant position in the service thanks to the pat- 
ronage of an important personage whose com- 
plete confidence he enjoyed, and he was begin- 
ning to make plans for marrying one of the 
richest heiresses in Petersburg, plans which 
might very easily be realized. When he entered 
the Rost6vs' drawing room Natdsha was in her 
own room. When she heard of his arrival she 
almost ran into the drawing room, flushed and 
beaming with a more than cordial smile. 

Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress, 
with dark eyes shining from under her curls 
and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had 
known her four years before; and so he was tak- 
en aback when quite a different Natasha en- 
tered, and his face expressed rapturous aston- 
ishment. This expression on his face pleased 
Natasha. 

"Well, do you recognize your little madcap 
playmate?" asked the countess. 

Boris kissed Natdsha's hand and said that he 
was astonished at the change in her. 

"How handsome you have grown!" 

"I should think sol replied Natdsha's laugh- 
ing eyes. 

"And is Papa older?" she asked. 

Natdsha sat down and, without joining in 
Boris* conversation with the countess, silently 
and minutely studied her childhood's suitor. 
He felt the weight of that resolute and affec- 
tionate scrutiny and glanced at her occasional- 
ly. 

Boris* uniform, spurs, tie, and the way his 
hair was brushed were all comme il faut and in 
the latest fashion. This Natdsha noticed at 
once. He sat rather sideways in the armchair 
next to the countess, arranging with his right 
hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left 
hand like a skin, and he spoke with a particu- 
larly refined compression of his lips about the 
amusements of the highest Petersburg society, 
recalling with mild irony old times in Mos- 



cow and Moscow acquaintances. It was not 
accidentally, Natasha felt, that he alluded, 
when speaking of the highest aristocracy, to an 
ambassador's ball he had attended, and to in- 
vitations he had received from N.N. and S.S. 

All this time Natdsha sat silent, glancing up 
at him from under her brows. This gaze dis- 
turbed and confused Boris more and more. He 
looked round more frequently toward her, and 
broke off in what he was saying. He did not 
stay more than ten minutes, then rose and took 
his leave. The same inquisitive, challenging, 
and rather mocking eyes still looked at him. 
After his first visit Boris said to himself that Na- 
tdsha attracted him just as much as ever, but 
that he must not yield to that feeling, because 
to marry her, a girl almost without fortune, 
would mean ruin to his career, while to renew 
their former relations without intending to 
marry her would be dishonorable. Boris made 
up his mind to avoid meeting Natdsha, but de- 
spite that resolution he called again a few days 
later and began calling often and spending 
whole days at the Rost6vs'. It seemed to him 
that he ought to have an explanation with Na- 
tdsha and tell her that the old times must be 
forgotten, that in spite of everything . . . she 
could not be his wife, that he had no means, 
and they would never let hermarryhim. But he 
failed to do so and felt awkward about enter- 
ing on such an explanation. From day to day 
he became more and more entangled. It seemed 
to her mother and S6nya that Natdsha was in 
love with Boris as of old. She sang him his fa- 
vorite songs, showed him her album, making 
him write in it, did not allow him to allude to 
the past, letting it be understood how delight- 
ful was the present; and every day he went away 
in a fog, without having said what he meant to, 
and not knowing what he was doing or why he 
came, or how it would alf end. He left off visit- 
ing Hdlene and received reproachful notes 
from her every day, and yet he continued to 
spend whole days with the Rost6vs. 

CHAPTER XIII 

ONE NIGHT when the old countess, in nightcap 
and dressing jacket, without her false curls, 
and with her poor little knob of hair showing 
under her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and 
groaning on a rug and bowing to the ground 
in prayer, her door creaked and Natdsha, also 
in a dressing jacket with slippers on her bare 
feet and her hair in curlpapers, ran in. The 
countess her prayerful mood dispelled 
looked round and frowned. She was finishing 



her last prayer: "Can it be that this couch will 
be my grave?" Natasha, flushed and eager, 
seeing her mother in prayer, suddenly checked 
her rush, half sat down, and unconsciously put 
out her tongue as if chiding herself. Seeing that 
her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe 
to the bed and, rapidly slipping one little foot 
against the other, pushed off her slippers and 
jumped onto the bed the countess had feared 
might become her grave. This couch was high, 
with a feather bed and five pillows each small- 
er than the one below. Natasha jumped on it, 
sank into the feather bed, rolled over to the 
wall, and began snuggling up the bedclothes 
as she settled down, raising her knees to her 
chin, kicking out and laughing almost inaudi- 
bly, now covering herself up head and all, and 
now peeping at her mother. The countess 
finished her prayers and came to the bed 
with a stern face, but seeing that Natasha's 
head was covered, she smiled in her kind, 
weak way. 

"Now then, now then!" said she. 

"Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said Na- 
tasha. "Now, just one on your throat and an- 
other . . . that'll do!" And seizing her mother 
round the neck, she kissed her on the throat. 
In her behavior to her mother Natasha seemed 
rough, but she was so sensitive and tactful that 
however she clasped her mother she always 
managed to do it without hurting her or mak- 
ing her feel uncomfortable or displeased. 

"Well, what is it tonight?" said the mother, 
having arranged her pillows and waited until 
Natdsha, after turning over a couple of times, 
had settled down beside her under the quilt, 
spread out her arms, and assumed a serious ex- 
pression. 

These visits of Natasha's at night before the 
count returned from his club were one of the 
greatest pleasures of both mother and daugh- 
ter. 

"What is it tonight? But I have to tell 
you ..." 

Natdsha put her hand on her mother's mouth. 

"About Boris ... I know," she said seriously; 
"that's what I have come about. Don't say it 
I know. No, do tell me!" and she removed her 
hand. "Tell me, Mamma! He's nice?" 

"Natasha, you are sixteen. At your age I was 
married. You say Boris is nice. He is very nice, 
and I love him like a son. But what then? . . . 
What are you thinking about? You have quite 
turned his head, I can see that. . . ." 

As she said this the countess looked round 
at her daughter. Natdsha was lying looking 



BOOK SIX 253 

steadily straight before her at one of the ma- 



hogany sphinxes carved on the corners of the 
bedstead, so that the countess only saw her 
daughter's face in profile. That face struck her 
by its peculiarly serious and concentrated ex- 
pression. 

Natdsha was listening and considering. 

"Well, what then?" said she. 

"You have quite turned his head, and why? 
What do you want of him? You know you can't 
marry him." 

"Why not?" said Natdsha, without changing 
her position. 

"Because he is young, because he is poor, be- 
cause he is a relation . . . and because you your- 
self don't love him." 

"How do you know?" 

"I know. It is not right, darling!" 

"But if I want to . . ," said Natdsha. 

"Leave off talking nonsense," said the count- 
ess. 

"But if I want to . . ." 

"Natdsha, I am in earnest . . ." 

Natdsha did not let her finish. She drew the 
countess' large hand to her, kissed it on the 
back and then on the palm, then again turned 
it over and began kissing first one knuckle, 
then the space between the knuckles, then the 
next knuckle, whispering, "January, February, 
March, April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don't 
you say anything? Speak!" said she, turning to 
her mother, who was tenderly gazing at her 
daughter and in that contemplation seemed to 
have forgotten all she had witffc&amp;to say. 

"It won't do, my love! Not everyone will un- 
derstand this friendship dating from your 
childish days, and to see him so intimate with 
you may injure you in the eyes of other young 
men who visit us, and above all it torments 
him for nothing. He may already have found a 
suitable and wealthy match, and now he's half 
crazy." 

"Crazy?" repeated Natdsha. 

"I'll tell you some things about myself. I had 
a cousin . . ." 

"I know! Cyril Matvdich . . . but he is old." 

"He was not always old. But this is what I'll 
do, Natdsha, I'll have a talk with Boris. He 
need not come so often, ..." 

"Why not, if he likes to?" 

"Because I know it will end in nothing. . , ." 

"How can you know? No, Mamma, don't 
speak to him! What nonsense!" said Natdsha 
in the tone of one being deprived of her prop- 
erty. "Well, I won't marry, but let him come if 
he enjoys it and I enjoy it." Natdsha smiled 



254 



WAR AND PEACE 



and looked at her mother. "Not to marry, but 
just so," she added. 

"How 50, my pet?" 

"Just so. There's no need for me to marry 
him. But . . . just 50." 

"Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and 
shaking all over, she went off into a good- 
humored, unexpected, elderly laugh. 

"Don't laugh, stop!" cried Natasha. "You're 
shaking the whole bedl You're awfully likeme, 
just such another giggler. . . . Wait . . ." and 
she seized the countess' hands and kissed a 
knuckle of the little finger, saying, "June," and 
continued, kissing, "July, August," on the oth- 
er hand. "But, Mamma, is he very much in 
love? What do you think? Was anybody ever 
so much in love with you? And he's very nice, 
very, very nice. Only not quite my taste he is 
so narrow, like the dining-room clock. . . . Don't 
you understand? Narrow, you know gray, light 
gray..." 

"What rubbish you're talking!" said the 
countess. 

Natasha continued: "Don't you really un- 
derstand? Nicholas would understand. . . . Be- 
zukhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and 
he is square." 

"You flirt with him too," said the countess, 
laughing. 

"No, he is a Freemason, I have found out. 
He is fine, dark-blue and red. . . . How can I 
explain it to you?" 

"Little countess!" the count's voice called 
from behind the door. "You're not asleep?" 
Natdsha jumped up, snatched up her slippers, 
and ran barefoot to her own room. 

It was a long time before she could sleep. 
She kept thinking that no one could under- 
stand all that she understood and all there was 
in her. 

"S6nya?" she thought, glancing at that curled- 
up, sleeping little kitten with her enormous 
plait of hair. "No, how could she? She's virtu- 
ous. She fell in love with Nicholas and does 
not wish to know anything more. Even Mam- 
ma does not understand. It is wonderful how 
clever I am and how . . . charming she is," she 
went on, speaking of herself in the third per- 
son, and imagining it was some very wise man 
the wisest and best of men who was saying 
it of her. "There is everything, everything in 
her," continued this man. "She is unusually in- 
telligent, charming . . . and then she is pretty, 
uncommonly pretty, and agile she swims and 
rides splendidly . . . and her voice! One can 
really say it's a wonderful voice 1" 



She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera 
by Cherubini, threw herself on her bed, laughed 
at the pleasant thought that she would imme- 
diately fall asleep, called Dunydsha the maid 
to put out the candle, and before Dunydsha 
had left the room had already passed into yet 
another happier world of dreams, where every- 
thing was as light and beautiful as in reality, 
and even more so because it was different. 

Next day the countess called Boris aside and 
had a talk with him, after which he ceased com- 
ing to the Rost6vs*. 

CHAPTER XIV 

ON THE THIRTY-FIRST OF DECEMBER, New Year's 

Eve, 1809-10, an old grandee of Catherine's 
day was giving a ball and midnight supper. 
The diplomatic corps and the Emperor himself 
were to be present. 

The grandee's well-known mansion on the 
English Quay glittered with innumerable lights. 
Police were stationed at the brightly lit en- 
trance which was carpeted with red baize, and 
not only gendarmes but dozens of police of- 
ficers and even the police master himself stood 
at the porch. Carriages kept driving away and 
fresh ones arriving, with red-liveried footmen 
and footmen in plumed hats. From the car- 
riages emerged men wearing uniforms, stars, 
and ribbons, while ladies in satin and ermine 
cautiously descended the carriage steps which 
were let down for them with a clatter, and then 
walked hurriedly and noiselessly over the baize 
at the entrance. 

Almost every time a new carriage drove up a 
whisper ran through the crowd and caps were 
doffed. 

"The Emperor? . . . No, a minister . . . prince 
. . . ambassador. Don't you see the plumes? . . ." 
was whispered among the crowd. 

One person, better dressed than the rest, 
seemed to know everyone and mentioned by 
name the greatest dignitaries of the day. 

A third of the visitors had already arrived, 
but the Rost6vs, who were to be present, were 
still hurrying to get dressed. 

There had been many discussions and prepa- 
rations for this ball in the Rost6v family, many 
fears that the invitation would not arrive, that 
the dresses would not be ready, or that some- 
thing would not be arranged as it should be. 

Mdrya Igndtevna Per6nskaya, a thin and 
shallow maid of honor at the court of the Dow- 
ager Empress, who was a friend and relation of 
the countess and piloted the provincial Rost6vs 



BOOK SIX 



in Petersburg high society, was to accompany 
them to the ball. 

They were to call for her at her house in the 
Taurida Gardens at ten o'clock, but it was al- 
ready five minutes to ten, and the girls were 
not yet dressed. 

Natasha was going to her first grand ball. She 
had got up at eight that morning and had been 
in a fever of excitement and activity all day. 
All her powers since morning had been con- 
centrated on ensuring that they all she her- 
self, Mamma, and S6nya should be as well 
dressed as possible. S6nya and her mother put 
themselves entirely in her hands. The countess 
was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and 
the two girls white gauze over pink silk slips, 
with roses on their bodices and their hair 
dressed &amp; In grecque. 

Everything essential had already been done; 
feet, hands, necks, and ears washed, perfumed, 
and powdered, as befits a ball; the openwork 
silk stockings and white satin shoes with rib- 
bons were already on; the hairdressing was al- 
most done. S6nya was finishing dressing and so 
was the countess, but Natasha, who had bustled 
about helping them all, was behindhand. She 
was still sitting before a looking-glass with a 
dressing jacket thrown over her slender shoul- 
ders. S6nya stood ready dressed in the middle 
of the room and, pressing the head of a pin till 
it hurt her dainty finger, was fixingon a lastrib- 
bon that squeaked as the pin went through it. 

"That's not the way, that's not the way, 
S6nya!" cried Natdsha turning her head and 
clutching with both hands at her hair which 
the maid who was dressing it had not time to 
release. "That bow is not right. Come here!" 

S6nya sat down and Natdsha pinned the rib- 
bon on differently. 

"Allow me, Missl I can't do it like that," said 
the maid who was holding Natasha's hair. 

"Oh, dearl Well then, wait. That's right, 
S6nya." 

"Aren't you ready? It is nearly ten," came 
the countess' voice. 

"Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?" 

"I have only my cap to pin on." 

"Don't do it without me!" called Natdsha. 
"You won't do it right." 

"But it's already ten." 

They had decided to be at the ball by half- 
past ten, and Natdsha had still to get dressed 
and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens. 

When her hair was done, Natasha, in her 
short petticoat from under which her dancing 
shoes showed, and in her mother's dressing 



jacket, ran up to S6nya, scrutinized her, and 
then ran to her mother. Turning her mother's 
head this way and that, she fastened on the cap 
and, hurriedly kissing her gray hair, ran back 
to the maids who were turning up the hem of 
her skirt. 

The cause of the delay was Natasha's skirt, 
which was too long. Two maids were turning 
up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends 
of thread. A third with pins in her mouth was 
running about between the countess and S6n- 
ya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossa- 
mer garment up high on one uplifted hand. 

"Mdvra, quicker, darling!" 

"Give me my thimble, Miss, from there . . ." 

"Whenever will you be ready?" asked the 
count coming to the door. "Here is some scent. 
Per6nskaya must be tired of waiting." 

"It's ready, Miss," said the maid, holding up 
the shortened gauze dress with two fingers, and 
blowing arid shaking something off it, as if by 
this to express a consciousness of the airiness 
and purity of what she held. 

Natdsha began putting on the dress. 

"In a minute! In a minute! Don't come in, 
Papa!" she cried to her father as he opened the 
door speaking from under the filmy skirt which 
still covered her whole face. 

Sonya slammed the door to. A minute later 
they let the count in. He was wearing a blue 
swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockings, and was 
perfumed and his hair pomaded. 

"Oh, Papal how nice you look! Charming!" 
cried Natasha, as she stood in the middle of the 
room smoothing out the folds of the gauze. 

"If you please, Miss! allow me," said the 
maid, who on her knees was pulling the skirt 
straight and shifting the pins from one side of 
her mouth to the other with her tongue. 

"Say what you like," exclaimed S6nya, in a 
despairing voice as she looked at Natdsha, "say 
what you like, it's still too long." 

Natdsha stepped back to look at herself in 
the pier glass. The dress was too long. 

"Really, madam, it is not at all too long," 
said Mdvra, crawling on her knees after her 
young lady. 

"Well, if it's too long we'll take it up ... 
we'll tack it up in one minute," said the reso- 
lute Dunydsha taking a needle that was stuck 
on the front of her little shawl and, still kneel- 
ing on the floor, set to work once more. 

At that moment, with soft steps, the count- 
ess came in shyly, in her cap and velvet gown. 

"Oo-oo, my beauty!" exclaimed the count, 
"she looks better than any of you!" 



WAR AND PEACE 



He would have embraced her but, blushing, 
she stepped aside fearing to be rumpled. 

"Mamma, your cap, more to this side," said 
Natdsha. "I'll arrange it," and she rushed for- 
ward so that the maids who were tacking up 
her skirt could not move fast enough and a 
piece of gauze was torn off. 

"Oh goodness! What has happened? Really 
it was not my fault I " 

"Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," 
said Dunydsha. 

"What a beauty a very queen!" said the 
nurse as she came to the door. "And S6nya! 
They are lovely I" 

At a quarter past ten they at last got into 
their carriages and started. But they had still 
to call at the Taurida Gardens. 

Per6nskaya was quite ready. In spite of her 
age and plainness she had gone through the 
same process as the Rost6vs, but with less flur- 
ryfor to her it was a matter of routine. Her 
ugly old body was washed, perfumed, and pow- 
dered in just the same way. She had washed be- 
hind her ears just as carefully, and when she 
entered her drawing room in her yellow dress, 
wearing her badge as maid of honor, her old 
lady's maid was as full of rapturous admira- 
tion as the Rost6vs' servants had been. 

She praised the Rost6vs' toilets. They praised 
her taste and toilet, and at eleven o'clock, care- 
ful of their coiffures and dresses, they settled 
themselves in their carriages and drove off. 

CHAPTER XV 

NATASHA had not had a moment free since 
early morning and had not once had time to 
think of what lay before her. 

In the damp chill air and crowded closeness 
of the swaying carriage, she for the first time 
vividly imagined what was in store for her 
there at the ball, in those brightly lighted rooms 
with music, flowers, dances, the Emperor, 
and all the brilliant young people of Peters- 
burg. The prospect was so splendid that she 
hardly believed it would come true, so out of 
keeping was it with the chill darkness and 
closeness of the carriage. She understood all 
that awaited her only when, after stepping 
over the red baize at the entrance, she entered 
the hall, took off her fur cloak, and, beside 
S6nya and in front of her mother, mounted 
the brightly illuminated stairs between the 
flowers. Only then did she remember how she 
must behave at a ball, and tried to assume the 
majestic air she considered indispensable for 
a girl on such an occasion. But, fortunately for 



her, she felt her eyes growing misty, she saw 
nothing clearly, her pulse beat a hundred to 
the minute, and the blood throbbed at her 
heart. She could not assume that pose, which 
would have made her ridiculous, and she moved 
on almost fainting from excitement and try- 
ing with all her might to conceal it. And this 
was the very attitude that became her best. Be- 
fore and behind them other visitors were en- 
tering, also talking in low tones and wearing 
ball dresses. The mirrors on the landing re- 
flected ladies in white, pale-blue, and pink 
dresses, with diamonds and pearls on their bare 
necks and arms. 

Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not 
distinguish her reflection from the others. All 
was blended into one brilliant procession. On 
entering the ballroom the regular hum of 
voices, footsteps, and greetings deafened Na- 
tdsha, and the light and glitter dazzled her still 
more. The host and hostess, who had already 
been standing at the door for half an hour re- 
peating the same words to the various arrivals, 
"Charmt de vous voir" l greeted the Rost6vs 
and Per6nskaya in the same manner. 

The two girls in their white dresses, each 
with a rose in her black hair, both curtsied in 
the same way, but the hostess' eye involuntarily 
rested longer on the slim Natasha. She looked 
at her and gave her alone a special smile in 
addition to her usual smile as hostess. Looking 
at her she may have recalled the golden, irre- 
coverable days of her own girlhood and her 
own first ball. The host also followed Natdsha 
with his eyes and asked the count which was 
his daughter. 

"Charming!" said he, kissing the tips of his 
fingers. 

In the ballroom, guests stood crowding at 
the entrance doors awaiting the Emperor. The 
countess took up a position in one of the front 
rows of that crowd. Natdsha heard and felt 
that several people were asking about her and 
looking at her. She realized that those noticing 
her liked her, and this observation helped to 
calm her. 

"There are some like ourselves and some 
worse," she thought. 

Per6nskaya was pointing out to the count- 
ess the most important people at the ball. 

"That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? 
That gray-haired man," she said, indicating an 
old man with a profusion of silver-gray curly 
hair, who was surrounded by ladies laughing at 
something he said. 

1 "Delighted to sec you." 



BOOK SIX 



257 



"Ah, here she is, the Queen of Petersburg, 
Countess Bezukhova," said Per6nskaya, indi- 
cating Hlne who had just entered. "How 
lovely! She is quite equal to Marya Ant6nov- 
na. 1 See how the men, young and old, pay court 
to her. Beautiful and clever . . . they say Prince 

is quite mad about her. But see, those two, 

though not good-looking, are even more run 
after." 

She pointed to a lady who was crossing the 
room followed by a very plain daughter. 

"She is a splendid match, a millionairess," 
said Per6nskaya. "And look, here come her 
suitors." 

"That is Bezukhova's brother, Anatole Ku- 
ragin," she said, indicating a handsome officer 
of the Horse Guards who passed by them with 
head erect, looking at somcthingover the heads 
of the ladies. "He's handsome, isn't he? I hear 
they will marry him to that rich girl. But your 
cousin, Drubetsk6y, is also very attentive to 
her. They say she has millions. Oh yes, that's 
the French ambassador himself!" she replied 
to the countess' inquiry about Caulaincourt. 
"Looks as if he were a king! All the same, the 
French are charming, very charming. No one 
more charming in society. Ah, here she is! Yes, 
she is still the most beautiful of them all, our 
Marya Ant6novna! And how simply she is 
dressed! Lovely! And that stout one in spec- 
tacles is the universal Freemason," she went 
on, indicating Pierre. "Put him beside his wife 
and he looks a regular buffoon!" 

Pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, 
making way through the crowd and nodding 
to right and left as casually and good-natured- 
ly as if he were passing through a crowd at a 
fair. He pushed through, evidently looking for 
someone. 

Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face 
of Pierre, "the buffoon," as Per6nskaya had 
called him, and knew he was looking for them, 
and for her in particular. He had promised to 
be at the ball and introduce partners to her. 

But before he reached them Pierre stopped 
beside a very handsome, dark man of middle 
height, and in a white uniform, who stood by 
a window talking to a tall man wearing stars 
and a ribbon. Natasha at once recognized the 
shorter and younger man in the white uni- 
form: it was Bolk6nski, who seemed to her 
to have grown much younger, happier, and 
better-looking. 

"There's someone else we know Bolk6nski, 
do you see, Mamma?" said Natasha, pointing 

1 Alexander I's mistress. TR. 



out Prince Andrew. "You remember, he stayed 
a night with us at Otradnoe." 

"Oh, you know him?" said Per6nskaya. "I 
can't bear him. // fait &amp; present la pluie et le 
beau temps. 9 He's too proud for anything. 
Takes after his father. And he's hand in glove 
with Sperdnski, writing some project or other. 
Just look how he treats the ladies! There's one 
talking to him and he has turned away," she 
said, pointing at him. "I'd give it to him if he 
treated me as he does those ladies." 

CHAPTER XVI 

SUDDENLY EVERYBODY STIRRED, began talking, 
and pressed forward and then back, and be- 
tween the two rows, which separated, the Em- 
peror entered to the sounds of music that had 
immediately struck up. Behind him walked his 
host and hostess. He walked in rapidly, bow- 
ing to right and left as if anxious to get the 
first moments of the reception over. The band 
played the polonaise in vogue at that time on 
account of the words that had been set to it, 
beginning: "Alexander, Elisaveta, all our hearts 
you ravish quite ..." The Emperor passed on 
to the drawing room, the crowd made a rush 
for the doors, and several persons with excited 
faces hurried there and back again. Then the 
crowd hastily retired from the drawing-room 
door, at which the Emperor reappeared talk- 
ing to the hostess. A young man, looking dis- 
traught, pounced down on the ladies, asking 
them to move aside. Some ladies, with faces be- 
traying complete forgetfulness of all the rules 
of decorum, pushed forward to the detriment 
of their toilets. The men began to choose part- 
ners and take their places for the polonaise. 

Everyone moved back, and the Emperor 
came smiling out of the drawing room leading 
his hostess by the hand but not keeping time 
to the music. The host followed with Marya 
Ant6novna Naryshkina; then came ambassa- 
dors, ministers, and various generals, whom 
Per6nskaya diligently named. More than half 
the ladies already had partners and were tak- 
ing up, or preparing to take up, their positions 
for the polonaise. Natasha felt that she would 
be left with her mother and S6nya among a 
minority of women who crowded near the wall, 
not having been invited to dance. She stood 
with her slender arms hanging down, her 
scarcely defined bosom rising and falling regu- 
larly, and with bated breath and glittering, 
frightened eyes gazed straight before her, evi- 
dently prepared for the height of joy or misery. 

8 "He is all the rage just now." 



WAR AND PEACE 



She was not concerned about the Emperor or 
any of those great people whom Per6nskaya 
was pointing out she had but one thought: 
"Is it possible no one will ask me, that I shall 
not be among the first to dance? Is it possible 
that not one of all these men will notice me? 
They do not even seem to see me, or if they do 
they look as if they were saying, 'Ah, she's not 
the one I'm after, so it's not worth looking at 
her!' No, it's impossible," she thought. "They 
must know how I long to dance, how splendid- 
ly I dance, and how they would enjoy dancing 
with me." 

The strains of the polonaise, which had con- 
tinued for a considerable time, had begun to 
sound like a sad reminiscence in Natasha's ears. 
She wanted to cry. Per6nskaya had left them. 
The count was at the other end of the room. 
She and the countess and S6nya were standing 
by themselves as in the depths of a forest amid 
that crowd of strangers, with no one interested 
in them and not wanted by anyone. Prince An- 
drew with a lady passed by, evidently not recog- 
nizing them. The handsome Anatole was smil- 
ingly talking to a partner on his arm and 
looked at Natdsha as one looks at a wall. Boris 
passed them twice and each time turned away. 
Berg and his wife, who were not dancing, came 
up to them. 

This family gathering seemed humiliating 
to Natdsha as if there were nowhere else for 
the family to talk but here at the ball. She did 
not listen to or look at Vera, who was telling 
her something about her own green dress. 

At last the Emperor stopped beside his last 
partner (he had danced with three) and the 
music ceased. A worried aide-de-camp ran up 
to the Rostrivs requesting them to stand far- 
ther back, though as it was they were already 
close to the wall, and from the gallery re- 
sounded the distinct, precise, enticingly rhyth- 
mical strains of a waltz. The Emperor looked 
smilingly down the room. A minute passed but 
no one had yet begun dancing. An aide-de- 
camp, the Master of Ceremonies, went up to 
Countess Bezukhova and asked her to dance. 
She smilingly raised her hand and laid it on 
his shoulder without looking at him. The aide- 
de-camp, an adept in his art, grasping his part- 
ner firmly round her waist, with confident de- 
liberation started smoothly, gliding first round 
the edge of the circle, then at the corner of the 
room he caught Hlne's left hand and turned 
her, the only sound audible, apart from the 
ever-quickening music, being the rhythmic click 
of the spurs on his rapid, agile feet, while at 



every third beat his partner's velvet dress spread 
out and seemed to flash as she whirled round. 
Natdsha gazed at them and was ready to cry 
because it was not she who was dancing that 
first turn of the waltz. 

Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a 
cavalry colonel, wearing stockings and danc- 
ing shoes, stood looking animated and bright 
in the front row of the circle not far from the 
Rost6vs. Baron Firhoff was talking to him 
about the first sitting of the Council of State to 
be held next day. Prince Andrew, as one close- 
ly connected with Sperdnski and participating 
in the work of the legislative commission, could 
give reliable information about that sitting, 
concerning which various rumors were cur- 
rent. But not listening to what Firhoff was say- 
ing, he was gazing now at the sovereign and 
now at the men intending to dance who had 
not yet gathered courage to enter the circle. 

Prince Andrew was watching these men 
abashed by the Emperor's presence, and the 
women who were breathlessly longing to be 
asked to dance. 

Pierre came up to him and caught him by 
the arm. 

"You always dance. I have a protge*e, the 
young Rost6va, here. Ask her," he said. 

"Where is she?" asked Bolk6nski. "Excuse 
me!" he added, turning to the baron, "we will 
finish this conversation elsewhere at a ball 
one must dance." He stepped forward in the 
direction Pierre indicated. The despairing, de- 
jected expression of Natdsha's face caught his 
eye. He recognized her, guessed her feelings, 
saw that it was her dbut, remembered her 
conversation at the window, and with an ex- 
pression of pleasure on his face approached 
Countess Rost6va. 

"Allow me to introduce you to my daughter," 
said the countess, with heightened color. 

"I have the pleasure of being already ac- 
quainted, if the countess remembers me," said 
Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow 
quite belying Per6nskaya's remarks about his 
rudeness, and approaching Natdsha he held 
out his arm to grasp her waist before he had 
completed his invitation. He asked her to waltz. 
That tremulous expression on Natdsha's face, 
prepared either for despair or rapture, sud- 
denly brightened into a happy, grateful, child- 
like smile. 

"I have long been waiting for you," that 
frightened happy little girl seemed to say by 
the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as 
she raised her hand to Prince Andrew's shoul- 



BOOK SIX 



der. They were the second couple to enter the 
circle. Prince Andrew was one of the best danc- 
ers of his day and Natasha danced exquisitely. 
Her little feetin their white satin dancing shoes 
did their work swiftly, lightly, and independ- 
ently of herself, while her face beamed with 
ecstatic happiness. Her slender bare arms and 
neck werenot beautiful compared to Helene's 
her shoulders looked thin and her bosom un- 
developed. But Helene seemed, as it were, hard- 
ened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks 
that had scanned her person, while Natasha was 
like a girl exposed for the first time, who would 
have felt very much ashamed had she not been 
assured that this was absolutely necessary. 

Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to 
escape as quickly as possible from the political 
and clever talk which everyone addressed to 
him, wishing also to break up the circle of re- 
straint he disliked, caused by the Emperor's 
presence, he danced, and had chosen Natasha 
because Pierre pointed her out to him and be- 
cause she was the first pretty girl who caught 
his eye; but scarcely had he embraced that slen- 
der supple figure and felt her stirring so close 
to him and smiling so near him than the wine 
of her charm rose to his head, and he felt him- 
self revived and rejuvenated when after leav- 
ing her he stood breathing deeply and watch- 
ing the other dancers. 

CHAPTER XVII 

AFTER PRINCE ANDREW, Boris came up to ask 
Natasha fora dance, and then the aide-de-camp 
who had opened the ball, and several other 
young men, so that, flushed and happy, and 
passing on her superfluous partners to S6nya, 
she did not cease dancing all the evening. She 
noticed and saw nothing of what occupied ev- 
eryone else. Not only did she fail to notice that 
the Emperor talked a long time with the French 
ambassador, and how particularly gracious he 
was to a certain lady, or that Prince So-and-so 
and So-and-so did and said this and that, and 
that Helene had great success andwashonored 
by the special attention of So-and-so, but she 
did not even see the Emperor, and only noticed 
that he had gone because the ball became live- 
lier after his departure. For one of the merry 
cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was 
again her partner. He reminded her of their 
first encounter in the Otradnoe avenue, and 
how she had been unable to sleep that moon- 
light night, and told her how he had involun- 
tarily overheard her. Natasha blushed at that 
recollection and tried to excuse herself, as if 



there had been something to be ashamed of in 
what Prince Andrew had overheard. 

Like all men who have grown up in society, 
Prince Andrew liked meeting someone there 
notof the conventional society stamp. Andsuch 
was Natasha, with her surprise, her delight, her 
shyness, and even her mistakes in speaking 
French. With her he behaved with special care 
and tenderness, sitting beside her and talking 
of the simplest and most unimportant matters; 
he admired her shy grace. In the middle of the 
cotillion, having completed one of the figures, 
Natdsha, still out of breath, was returning to 
her seat when another dancer chose her. She 
was tired and panting and evidently thought 
of declining, but immediately put her hand 
gaily on the man's shoulder, smiling at Prince 
Andrew. 

"I'd be glad to sit beside you and rest: I'm 
tired; but you see how they keep asking me, 
and I'm glad of it, I'm happy and I love every- 
body, and you and I understand it all," and 
much, much more was said in her smile. When 
her partner left her Natasha ran across the 
room to choose two ladies for the figure. 

"If she goes to her cousin first and then to 
another lady, she will be my wife," said Prince 
Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as 
he watched her. She did go first to her cousin. 

"Whatrubbish sometimes enters one's head 1" 
thought Prince Andrew, "but what is certain is 
that that girl is so charming, so original, that 
she won't be dancing here a month before she 
will be married. . . . Such as she are rare here," 
he thought, as Natdsha, readjusting a rose that 
was slipping on her bodice, settled herself be- 
side him. 

When the cotillion was over the old count in 
his blue coat came up to the dancers. He invit- 
ed Prince Andrew to come and see them, and 
asked his daughter whether she was enjoying 
herself. Natdsha did not answer at once but 
only looked up with a smile that said reproach- 
fully: "How can you ask such a question?" 

"I have never enjoyed myself so much be- 
forel" she said, and Prince Andrew noticed 
how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace 
her father and instantly dropped again. Nata- 
sha was happier than she had ever been in her 
life. She was at that height of bliss when one 
becomes completely kind and good and does 
not believe in the possibility of evil, unhappi- 
ness, or sorrow. 

At that ball Pierre for the first time felt 
humiliated by the position his wife occupied 
in court circles. He was gloomy and absent- 



260 



WAR AND PEACE 



minded. A deep furrow ran across his fore- 
head, and standing by a window he stared 
over his spectacles seeing no one. 

On her way to supper Natasha passed him. 

Pierre's gloomy, unhappy look struck her. 
She stopped in front of him. She wished to help 
him, to bestow on him the superabundance of 
her own happiness. 

"How delightful it is, Count!"said she. "Isn't 
it?" 

Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not 
grasping what she said. 

"Yes, I am very glad," he said. 

"How can people be dissatisfied with any- 
thing?" thought Natdsha. "Especially such a 
capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyes 
all the people at the ball alike were good, kind, 
and splendid people, loving one another; none 
of them capable of injuring another and so 
they ought all to be happy. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

NEXT DAY Prince Andrew thought of the ball, 
but his mind did not dwell on it long. "Yes, it 
was a very brilliant ball," and then . . . "Yes, 
that little Rost6va is very charming. There's 
something fresh, original, un-Petersburg-like 
about her that distinguishes her." That was all 
he thought about yesterday's ball, and after his 
morning tea he set to work. 

But either from fatigue or want of sleep he 
was ill-disposed for work and could get noth- 
ing done. He kept criticizing his own work, as 
he often did, and was glad when he heard some- 
one coming. 

The visitor was Bftski, who served on var- 
ious committees, frequented all the societies in 
Petersburg, and was a passionate devotee of the 
new ideas and of Sperdnski, and a diligent Pe- 
tersburg newsmonger one of those men who 
choose their opinions like their clothes accord- 
ing to the fashion, but who for that very reason 
appear to be the wannest partisans. Hardly 
had he got rid of his hat before he ran into 
Prince Andrew's room with a preoccupied air 
and at once began talking. He had just heard 
particulars of that morning's sitting of the 
Council of State opened by the Emperor, and 
he spoke of it enthusiastically. The Emperor's 
speech had been extraordinary. It had been a 
speech such as only constitutional monarchs 
deliver. "The Sovereign plainly said that the 
Council and Senate are estates of the realm, he 
said that the government must rest not on au- 
thority but on secure bases. The Emperor said 
that the fiscal system must be reorganized and 



the accounts published," recounted Bitski, em- 
phasizing certain words and opening his eyes 
significantly. 

"Ah, yesl Today's events mark an epoch, the 
greatest epoch in our history," he concluded. 

Prince Andrew listened to the account of 
the opening of the Council of State, which he 
had so impatiently awaited and to which he 
had attached such importance, and was sur- 
prised that this event, now that it had taken 
place, did not affect him, and even seemed 
quite insignificant. He listened with quiet 
irony to Bitski's enthusiastic account of it. A 
very simple thought occurred to him: "What 
does it matter to me or to Bftski what the Em- 
peror was pleased to say at the Council? Can 
all that make me any happier or better?" 

And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed 
all the interest Prince Andrew had felt in the 
impending reforms. He was going to dine that 
evening at Sperdnski's, "with only a few 
friends," as the host had said when inviting 
him. The prospect of that dinner in the inti- 
mate home circle of the man he so admired had 
greatly interested Prince Andrew, especially as 
he had not yet seen Sperdnski in his domestic 
surroundings, but now he felt disinclined to go 
to it. 

At the appointed hour, however, he entered 
the modest house Sperdnski owned in the Tau- 
rida Gardens. In the parqueted dining room of 
this small house, remarkable for its extreme 
cleanliness (suggesting that of a monastery), 
Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found 
the friendly gathering of Sperdnski's intimate 
acquaintances already assembled at five o'clock. 
There were no ladies present except Sperdnski's 
little daughter (long-faced like her father) and 
her governess. The other guests were Gervais, 
Magnftski, and Stoly'pin. While still in the an- 
teroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and 
a ringing staccato laugh a laugh such as one 
hears on the stage. Someone it sounded like 
Sperdnski was distinctly ejaculating ha-ha-ha. 
Prince Andrew had never before heard Sperdn- 
ski's famous laugh, and this ringing, high- 
pitched laughter from a statesman made a 
strange impression on him. 

He entered the din ing room. The whole com- 
pany were standing between two windows at 
a small table laid with hors-d'oeuvres. Speran- 
ski, wearing a gray swallow-tail coat with a star 
on the breast, and evidently still the same waist- 
coat and high white stock he had worn at the 
meeting of the Council of State, stood at the 
table with a beaming countenance. His guests 



BOOK SIX 



261 



surrounded him. Magnitski, addressing him- 
self to Sperdnski, was relating an anecdote, 
and Sperdnski was laughing in advance at what 
Magnitski was going to say. When Prince An- 
drew entered the room Magnitski's words were 
again crowned by laughter. Stolypin gave a 
deep bass guffaw as he munched a piece of bread 
and cheese. Gervais laughed softly with a hiss- 
ing chuckle, and Sperdnski in a high-pitched 
staccato manner. 

Still laughing, Sperdnski held out his soft 
white hand to Prince Andrew. 

"Very pleased to see you, Prince/' he said. 
"Onemoment . . ." he wenton, turning to Mag- 
nftski and interrupting his story. "We have 
agreed that this is a dinner for recreation, with 
not a word about business!" and turning again 
to the narrator he began to laugh afresh. 

Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Spe- 
rdnski with astonishment, regret, and disillu- 
sionment. It seemed to him that this was not 
Sperdnski but someone else. Everything that 
had formerly appeared mysterious and fascinat- 
ing in Sperdnski suddenly became plain and 
unattractive. 

At dinner the conversation did not cease for 
a moment and seemed to consist of the contents 
of a book of funny anecdotes. Before Magnft- 
ski had finished his story someone else was anx- 
ious to relate something still funnier. Most of 
the anecdotes, if not relating to the state serv- 
ice, related to people in the service. It seemed 
that in this company the insignificance of those 
people was so definitely accepted that the only 
possible attitude toward them was one of good- 
humored ridicule. Sperdnski related how at the 
Council that morning a deaf dignitary, when 
asked his opinion, replied that he thought so 
too. Gervais gave a long account of an official 
revision, remarkable for the stupidity of every- 
body concerned. Stolypin, stuttering, broke in- 
to the conversation and began excitedly talk- 
ing of the abuses that existed under the former 
order of things threatening to give a serious 
turn to the conversation. Magnitski starting 
quizzing Stolypin about his vehemence. Ger- 
vais intervened with a joke, and the talk revert- 
ed to its former lively tone. 

Evidently Sperdnski liked to rest after his 
labors and find amusement in a circle of 
friends, and his guests, understanding his wish, 
tried to enliven him and amuse themselves. But 
their gaiety seemed to Prince Andrew mirthless 
and tiresome. Sperdn ski's high-pitched voice 
struck him unpleasantly, and the incessant 
laughter grated on him like a false note. Prince 



Andrew didnot laugh and feared that hewould 
be a damper on the spirits of the company, but 
no one took any notice of his being out of har- 
mony with the general mood. They all seemed 
very gay. 

He tried several times to join in the conver- 
sation, but his remarks were tossed aside each 
time like a cork thrown out of the water, and 
he could not jest with them. 

There was nothing wrong or unseemly in 
what they said, it was witty and might have 
been funny, but it lacked just that something 
which is the salt of mirth, and they were not 
even aware that such a thing existed. 

After dinner Sperdnski's daughter and her 
governess rose. He patted the little girl with 
his white hand and kissed her. And that ges- 
ture, too, seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew. 

The men remained at table over their port- 
English fashion. In the midst of a conversation 
that was started about Napoleon's Spanish af- 
fairs, which they all agreed in approving, 
Prince Andrew began to express a contrary 
opinion. Sperdnski smiled and, with an evi- 
dent wish to prevent the conversation from 
taking an unpleasant course, told a story that 
had no connection with the previous conver- 
sation. For a few moments all were silent. 

Having sat some time at table, Sperdnski 
corked a bottle of wine and, remarking, "Now- 
adays good wine rides in a carriage and pair," 
passed it to the servant and got up. All rose and 
continuing to talk loudly went into the drawing 
room. Two letters brought by a courier were 
handed to Sperdnski and he took them to his 
study. As soon as he had left the room the gen- 
eral merriment stopped and the guests began 
to converse sensibly and quietly with one an- 
other. 

"Now for the recitation!" said Sperdnski on 
return ing from his study. "A wonderful talent!" 
he said to Prince Andrew, and Magnftski im- 
mediately assumed a pose and began reciting 
some humorous verses in French which he had 
composed about various well-known Peters- 
burg people. He was interrupted several times 
by applause. When the verses were finished 
Prince Andrew went up to Sperdnski and took 
his leave. 

"Where are you off to so early?" asked Spe- 
rdnski. 

"I promised to go to a reception." 

They said no more. Prince Andrew looked 
closely into those mirrorlike, impenetrable 
eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of him 
to have expected anything from Sperdnski and 



26* 



WAR AND PEACE 



from any of his own activities connected with 
him, or ever to have attributed importance to 
what Sperdnski was doing. That precise, mirth- 
less laughter rang in Prince Andrew's ears long 
after he had left the house. 

When he reached home Prince Andrew be- 
gan thinking of his life in Petersburg during 
those last four months as if it were something 
new. He recalled his exertions and solicitations, 
and the history of his project of army reform, 
which had been accepted for consideration and 
which they were trying to pass over in silence 
simply because another, a very poor one, had 
already been prepared and submitted to the 
Emperor. He thought of the meetings of a com- 
mittee of which Berg was a member. He remem- 
bered how carefully and at what length every- 
thing relating to form and procedure was dis- 
cussed at those meetings, and how sedulously 
and promptly all that related to the gist of the 
business was evaded. He recalled his labors on 
the Legal Code, and how painstakingly he had 
translated the articles of the Roman and French 
codes into Russian, and he felt ashamed of him- 
self. Then he vividly pictured to himself Bo- 
guchdrovo, his occupations in the country, his 
journey to Ryazan; he remembered the peas- 
ants and Dron the village elder, and mentally 
applying to them the Personal Rights he had 
divided into paragraphs, he felt astonished that 
he could have spent so much time on such use- 
less work. 

CHAPTER XIX 

NEXT DAY Prince Andrew called at a few houses 
he had not visited before, and among them at 
the Rost6vs' with whom he had renewed ac- 
quaintance at the ball. Apart from considera- 
tions of politeness which demanded the call, he 
wanted to see that original, eager girl who had 
left such a pleasant impression on his mind, in 
her own home. 

Natdsha was one of the first to meet him. She 
was wearing a dark-blue house dress in which 
Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than 
in her ball dress. She and all the Rost6v family 
welcomed him as an old friend, simply and cor- 
dially. The whole family, whom he had former- 
ly judged severely, now seemed to him to con- 
sist of excellent, simple, and kindly people. The 
old count's hospitality and good nature, which 
struck one especially in Petersburg as a pleas- 
ant surprise, were such that Prince Andrew 
could not refuse to stay to dinner. "Yes," he 
thought, "they are capital people, whoof course 
have not the slightest idea what a treasure they 



possess in Natdsha; but they are kindly folk and 
form the best possible setting for this striking- 
ly poetic, charming girl, overflowing with life!" 

In Natdsha Prince Andrew was conscious of 
a strange world completely alien to him and 
brimful of joys unknown to him, a different 
world, that in the Otrddnoe avenue and at the 
window that moonlight night had already be- 
gun to disconcert him. Now this world discon- 
certed him no longer and was no longer alien 
to him, but he himself having entered it found 
in it a new enjoyment. 

After dinner Natdsha, at Prince Andrew's re- 
quest, went to the clavichord and began sing- 
ing. Prince Andrew stood by a window talking 
to the ladies and listened to her. In the midst 
of a phrase he ceased speaking and suddenly 
felt tears choking him, a thing he had thought 
impossible for him. He looked at Natdsha as 
she sang, and something new and joyful stirred 
in his soul. He felt happy and at the same time 
sad. He had absolutely nothing to weep about 
yet he was ready to weep. What about? His 
former love? The little princess? His disillu- 
sionments? . . . His hopes for the future? . . . 
Yes and no. The chief reason was a sudden, viv- 
id sense of the terrible contrast between some- 
thing infinitely great and illimitable within 
him and that limited and material something 
that he, and even she, was. This contrast 
weighed on and yet cheered himwhileshesang. 

As soon as Natdsha had finished she went up 
to him and asked how he liked her voice. She 
asked this and then became confused, feeling 
that she ought not to have asked it. He smiled, 
looking at her, and said he liked her singing as 
he liked everything she did. 

Prince Andrew left the Rost6vs' late in the 
evening. He went to bed from habit, but soon 
realized that he could not sleep. Having lit his 
candle he sat up in bed, then got up, then lay 
down again not at all troubled by his sleepless- 
ness: his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he 
had stepped out of a stuffy room into God's 
own fresh air. It did not enter his head that he 
was in love with Natdsha; he was not thinking 
about her, but only picturing her to himself, 
and in consequence all life appeared in a new 
light. "Why do I strive, why do I toil in this 
narrow, confined frame, when life, all life with 
all its joys, is open to me?" said he to himself. 
And for the first time for a very long while he 
began making happy plans for the future. He 
decided that he must attend to his son's educa- 
tion by finding a tutor and putting the boy in 
his charge, then he ought to retire from theserv- 



BOOK SIX 



263 



ice and go abroad, and see England, Switzer- 
land, and Italy. "I must use my freedom while 
I feel so much strength and youth in me," he 
said to himself. "Pierre was right when he said 
one must believe in the possibility of happiness 
in order to be happy, and now I do believe in 
it. Let the dead bury their dead, but while one 
has life one must live and be happy!" thought 
he. 

CHAPTER XX 

ONE MORNING Colonel Berg, whom Pierre knew 
as he knew everybody in Moscow and Peters- 
burg, came to see him. Berg arrived in an im- 
maculate brand-new uniform, with his hair po- 
maded and brushed forward over his temples 
as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair. 

"I have just been to see the countess, your 
wife. Unfortunately she could not grant my re- 
quest, but I hope, Count, I shall be more for- 
tunate with you," he said with a smile. 

"What is it you wish, Colonel? I am at your 
service." 

"I have now quite settled in my new rooms, 
Count" (Berg said this with perfect conviction 
that this information could not but be agree- 
able), "and so I wish to arrange just a small par- 
ty formy own and my wife's friends." (Hesmiled 
still more pleasantly.) "I wished to ask the 
countess and you to do me the honor of coming 
to tea and to supper." 

Only Countess Hlne, considering the soci- 
ety of such people as the Bergs beneath her, 
could be cruel enough to refuse such an invita- 
tion. Berg explained so clearly why he wanted 
to collect at his house a small but select com- 
pany, and why this would give him pleasure, 
and why though he grudged spending money 
,on cards or anything harmful, he was prepared 
to run into some expense for the sake of good 
societythat Pierre could not refuse, and 
promised to come. 

"But don't be late, Count, if I may venture 
to ask; about ten minutes to eight, please. We 
shall make up a rubber. Our general is coming. 
He is very good to me. We shall have supper, 
Count. So you will do me the favor." 

Contrary to his habit of being late, Pierre 
on that day arrived at the Bergs' house, not at 
ten but at fifteen minutes to eight. 

Having prepared everything necessary for 
the party, the Bergs were ready for their guests' 
arrival. 

In their new, clean, and light study with its 
small busts and pictures and new furniture sat 
Berg and his wife. Berg, closely buttoned up 



in his new uniform, sat beside his wife explain- 
ing to her that one always could and should be 
acquainted with people above one, because on- 
ly then does one get satisfaction from acquaint- 
ances. 

"You can get to know something, you can 
ask for something. See how I managed from 
my first promotion." (Berg measured his life 
not by years but by promotions.) "My comrades 
are still nobodies, while I am only waiting for 
a vacancy to command a regiment, and have 
the happiness to be your husband." (He rose 
and kissed Vcra's hand, and on the way to her 
straightened out a turned-up corner of the car- 
pet.) "And how have I obtained all this? Chief- 
ly by knowing how to choose my acquaintances. 
It goes without saying that one must be consci- 
entious and methodical." 

Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority 
over a weak woman, and paused, reflecting that 
this dear wife of his was after all but a weak 
woman who could not understand all that con- 
stitutes a man's dignity, what it was ein Mann 
zu sein.* Wra at the same time was smiling with 
a sense of superiority over her good, conscien- 
tious husband, who all the same understood 
life wrongly, as according to Ve*ra all men did. 
Berg, judging by his wife, thought all women 
weak and foolish. Vera, judging only by her 
husband and generalizing from that observa- 
tion, supposed that all men, though they un- 
derstand nothing and are conceited and sel- 
fish, ascribe common sense to themselves alone. 

Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, 
so as not to crush her lace fichu for which he 
had paid a good price, kissing her straight on 
the lips. 

"The only thing is, we mustn't have chil- 
dren too soon," he continued, following an un- 
conscious sequence of ideas. 

"Yes," answered Ve*ra, "I don't at all want 
that. We must live for society." 

"Princess Yusiipova wore one exactly like 
this," said Berg, pointing to the fichu with a 
happy and kindly smile. 

Just then Count Beziikhov was announced. 
Husband and wife glanced at one another, 
both smiling with self-satisfaction, and each 
mentally claiming the honor of this visit. 

"This is what comes of knowing how to make 
acquaintances," thought Berg. "This is what 
comes of knowing how to conduct oneself." 

"But please don't interrupt me when I am 
entertaining the guests," said Vera, "because I 
know what interests each of them and what to 

1 To be a man. 



264 

say to different people." 

Berg smiled again. 

"It can't be helped: men must sometimes 
have masculine con versa tion," said he. 

They received Pierre in their small, new 
drawing-room, where it was impossible to sit 
down anywhere without disturbing its sym- 
metry, neatness, and order; so it was quite 
comprehensible and not strange that Berg, hav- 
ing generously offered to disturb the symmetry 
of an armchair or of the sofa for his dear guest, 
but being apparently painfully undecided on 
the matter himself, eventually left the visitor 
to settle the question of selection. Pierre dis- 
turbed the symmetry by moving a chair for him- 
self, and Berg and V^ra immediately began their 
evening party, interrupting each other in their 
efforts to entertain their guest. 

Ve*ra, having decided in her own mind that 
Pierre ought to be entertained with conversa- 
tion about the French embassy, at once began 
accordingly. Berg, having decided that mascu- 
line conversation was required, interrupted his 
wife's remarks and touched on the question of 
the war with Austria, and unconsciously 
jumped from the general subject to personal 
considerations as to the proposals made him to 
take part in the Austrian campaign and the 
reasons why he had declined them. Though 
the conversation was very incoherent and Ve*ra 
was angry at the intrusion of the masculine el- 
ement, both husband and wife felt with satis- 
faction that, even if only one guest was pres- 
ent, their evening had begun very well and was 
as like as two peas to every other evening party 
with its talk, tea, and lighted candles. 

Before long Boris, Berg's old comrade, ar- 
rived. There was a shade of condescension and 
patronage in his treatment of Berg and Ve*ra. 
After Boris came a lady with the colonel, then 
the general himself, then the Rost6vs, and the 
party became unquestionably exactly like all 
other evening parties. Berg and Ve*ra could not 
repress their smiles of satisfaction at the sight 
of all this movement in their drawing room, at 
the sound of the disconnected talk, the rustling 
of dresses, and the bowing and scraping. Every- 
thing was just as everybody always has it, es- 
pecially so the general, who admired the apart- 
ment, patted Berg on the shoulder, and with 
parental authority superintended the setting 
out of the table for boston. The general sat 
down by Count Ilya Rost6v, who was next to 
himself the most important guest. The old peo- 
ple sat with the old, the young with the young, 
and the hostess at the tea table, on which stood 



WAR AND PEACE 

exactly the same kind of cakes in a silver cake 



basket as the Panins had at their party. Every- 
thing was just as it was everywhere else. 

CHAPTER XXI 

PIERRE, as one of the principal guests, had to 
sit down to boston with Count Rost6v, the 
general, and the colonel. At the card table he 
happened to be directly facing Natdsha, and 
was struck by a curious change that had come 
over her since the ball. She was silent, and not 
only less pretty than at the ball, but only re- 
deemed from plainness by her look of gentle 
indifference to everything around. 

"What's the matter with her?" thought 
Pierre, glancing at her. She was sitting by her 
sister at the tea table, and reluctantly, without 
looking at him, made some reply to Boris who 
sat down beside her. After playing out a 
whole suit and to his partner's delight taking 
five tricks, Pierre, hearing greetings and the 
steps of someone who had entered the room 
while he was picking up his tricks, glanced 
again at Natasha. 

"What has happened to her?" he asked him- 
self with still greater surprise. 

Prince Andrew was standing before her, 
saying something to her with a look of tender 
solicitude. She, having raised her head, w-is 
looking up at him, flushed and evidently try- 
ing to master her rapid breathing. And the 
bright glow of some inner fire that had been 
suppressed was again alight in her. She was 
completely transformed and from a plain girl 
had again become what she had been at the 
ball. 

Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the 
latter noticed a new and youthful expression 
in his friend's face. 

Pierre changed places several times during 
the game, sitting now with his back to Natdsha 
and now facing her, but during the whole of 
the six rubbers he watched her and his friend. 

"Something very important is happening be- 
tween them," thought Pierre, and a feeling that 
was both joyful and painful agitated him and 
made him neglect the game. 

After six rubbers the general got up, saying 
that it was no use playing like that, and Pierre 
was released. Natdsha on one side was talking 
with S6nya and Boris, and Ve*ra with a subtle 
smile was saying something to Prince Andrew. 
Pierre went up to his friend and, asking wheth- 
er they were talking secrets, sat down beside 
them. Vra, having noticed Prince Andrew's 
attentions to Natdsha, decided that at a party, 



BOOK SIX 



265 



a real evening party, subtle allusions to the 
tender passion were absolutely necessary and, 
seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was 
alone, began a conversation with him about 
feelings in general and about her sister. With 
so intellectual a guest as she considered Prince 
Andrew to be, she felt that she had to employ 
her diplomatic tact. 

When Pierre went up to them he noticed 
that Vera was being carried away by her self- 
satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemed 
embarrassed, a thing that rarely happened with 
him. 

"What do you think?" Wra was saying with 
an arch smile. "You are so discerning, Prince, 
and understand people's characters so well at 
a glance. What do you think of Natalie? Could 
she be constant in her attachments? Could she, 
like other women" (Vra meant herself), "love 
a man once for all and remain true to him for- 
ever? That is what I consider true love. What 
do you think, Prince?" 

"I know your sister too little," replied Prince 
Andrew, with a sarcastic smile under which he 
wished to hide his embarrassment, "to be able 
to solve so delicate a question, and then I have 
noticed that the less attractive a woman is the 
more constant she is likely to be," he added, 
and looked up at Pierre who was just approach- 
ing them. 

"Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days," con- 
tinued Wra mentioning "our days" as peo- 
ple of limited intelligence are fond of doing, 
imagining that they have discovered and ap- 
praised the peculiar! ties of "our days" and that 
human characteristics change with the times 
"in our days a girl has so much freedom that 
the pleasure of being courted often stifles real 
feeling in her. And it must be confessed that 
Natalie is very susceptible." This return to the 
subject of Natalie caused Prince Andrew to 
knit his brows with discomfort: he was about 
to rise, but Wra continued with a still more 
subtle smile: 

"I think no one has been more courted than 
she," she went on, "but till quite lately she nev- 
er cared seriously for anyone. Now you know, 
Count," she said to Pierre, "even our dear cous- 
in Boris, who, between ourselves, was very far 
gone in the land of tenderness . . ." (alluding 
to a map of love much in vogue at that time). 

Prince Andrew frowned and remained si- 
lent. 

"You are friendly with Bods, aren't you?" 
asked V6ra. 

"Yes, I know him. ..." 



"I expect he has told you of his childish love 
for Natasha?" 

"Oh, there was childish love?" suddenly asked 
Prince Andrew, blushing unexpectedly. 

"Yes, you know between cousins intimacy 
often leads to love. Le cousinage est un dan- 
gereux voisinage* Don't you think so?" 

"Oh , undoubtedly I " said Prince Andrew, and 
with sudden and unnatural liveliness he began 
chaffing Pierre about the need to be very care- 
ful with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and 
in the midst of these jesting remarks he rose, 
taking Pierre by the arm, and drew him aside. 

"Well?" asked Pierre, seeing his friend's 
strange animation with surprise, and noticing 
the glance he turned on Natisha as he rose. 

"I must ... I must have a talk with you," 
said Prince Andrew. "You know that pair of 
women's gloves?" (He referred to the ftf asonic 
gloves given to a newly initiated Brother to 
present to the woman he loved.) "I ... but no, 
I will talk to you later on," and with a strange 
light in his eyes and restlessness in his move- 
ments, Prince Andrew approached Natdsha 
and sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Prince 
Andrew asked her something and how she 
flushed as she replied. 

But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and 
began insisting that he should take part in an 
argument between the general and the colonel 
on the affairs in Spain. 

Berg was satisfied and happy. The smile of 
pleasure never left his face. The party was very 
successful and quite like other parties he had 
seen. Everything was similar: the ladies' subtle 
talk, the cards, the general raising his voice at 
the card table, and the samovar arid the tea 
cakes; only one thing was lacking that he had al- 
ways seen at the evening parties he wished to 
imitate. They had not yet had a loud conversa- 
tion among the men and a dispute about some- 
thing important and clever. Now the general 
had begun such a discussion and so Berg drew 
Pierre to it. 

CHAPTER XXII 

NEXT DAY, having been invited by the count, 
Prince Andrew dined with the Rost6vs and 
spent the rest of the day there. 

Everyone in the house realized for whose 
sake Prince Andrew came, and without con- 
cealing it he tried to be with Natdsha all day. 
Not only in the soul of the frightened yet hap- 
py and enraptured Natisha, but in the whole 
house, there was a feeling of awe at something 

1 "Cousinhood is a dangerous neighbor hood." 



266 



WAR AND PEACE 



important that was bound to happen. The 
countess looked with sad and sternly serious 
eyes at Prince Andrew when he talked to Na- 
tdsha and timidly started some artificial con- 
versation about trifles as soon as he looked her 
way. S6nya was afraid to leave NatAsha and 
afraid of being in the way when she was with 
them, Natasha grew pale, in a panic of expec- 
tation, when she remained alone with him for 
a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by his 
timidity. She felt that he wanted to say some- 
thing to her but could not bring himself to do 
so. 

In the evening, when Prince Andrew had 
left, the countess went up to Natdsha and 
whispered: "Well, what?" 

"Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me 
anything now! One can't talk about that," said 
Natdsha. 

But all the same that night Natdsha, now 
agitated and now frightened, lay a long time in 
her mother's bed gazing straight before her. 
She told her how he had complimented her, 
how he told her he was going abroad, asked her 
where they were going to spend the summer, 
and then how he had asked her about Boris. 

"But such a ... such a ... never happened 
to me before!" she said. "Only I feel afraid in 
his presence. I am always afraid when I'm with 
him. What does that mean? Does it mean that 
it's the real thing? Yes? Mamma, are you 
asleep?" 

"No, my love; I am frightened myself," an- 
swered her mother. "Now go!" 

"All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, 
to sleep! Mummy! Mummy! such a thing never 
happened to me before," she said, surprised 
and alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in 
herself. "And could we ever have thought! . . ." 

It seemed to Natdsha that even at the time 
she first saw Prince Andrew at Otradnoe she 
had fallen in love with him. It was as if she 
feared this strange, unexpected happiness of 
meeting again the very man she had then cho- 
sen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) 
and of finding him, as it seemed, not indiffer- 
ent to her. 

"And it had to happen that he should come 
specially to Petersburg while we are here. And 
it had to happen that we should meet at that 
ball. It is fate. Clearly it is fate that everything 
led up to this! Already then, directly I saw him 
I felt something peculiar." 

"What else did he say to you? What are those 
verses? Read them . . ." said her mother, 
thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince 



Andrew had written in Natdsha's album. 

"Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his 
being a widower?" 

"Don't, Natdshal Pray to God. 'Marriages 
are made in heaven,' " said her mother. 

"Darling Mummy, how I love you! How hap- 
py I am!" cried Natdsha, shedding tears of joy 
and excitement and embracing her mother. 

At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting 
with Pierre and telling him of his love for Na- 
tdsha and his firm resolve to make her his wife. 

That day Countess Hlene had a reception 
at her house. The French ambassador was there, 
and a foreign prince of the blood who had of 
late become a frequent visitor of hers, and 
many brilliant ladies and gentlemen. Pierre, 
who had come downstairs, walked through the 
rooms and struck everyone by his preoccupied, 
absent-minded, and morose air. 

Since the ball he had felt the approach of a 
fit of nervous depression and had made desper- 
ate efforts to combat it. Since the intimacy of 
his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had un- 
expectedly been made a gentleman of the bed- 
chamber, and from that time he had begun to 
feel oppressed and ashamed in court society, 
and dark thoughts of the vanity of all things 
human came to him oftener than before. At 
the same time the feeling he had noticed be- 
tween his protge*e Natasha and Prince An- 
drew accentuated his gloom by the contrast be- 
tween his own position and his friend's. He 
tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife, 
and about Natasha and Prince Andrew; and 
again everything seemed to him insignificant 
in comparison with eternity; again the ques- 
tion: for what? presented itself; and he forced 
himself to work day and night at Masonic la- 
bors, hoping to drive away the evil spirit that 
threatened him. Toward midnight, after he 
had left the countess' apartments, he was sit- 
ting upstairs in a shabby dressing gown, copy- 
ing out the original transactions of the Scottish 
lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room 
cloudy with tobacco smoke, when someone 
came in. It was Prince Andrew. 

"Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccu- 
pied, dissatisfied air. "And I, you see, am hard 
at it." He pointed to his manuscript book with 
that air of escaping from the ills of life with 
which unhappy people look at their work. 

Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic ex- 
pression of renewed life on his face, paused in 
front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look, 
smiled at him with the egotism of joy. 

"Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell 



BOOK 

you about it yesterday and I have come to do 
so today. I never experienced anything like it 
before. I am in love, my friend!" 

Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and 
dumped his heavy person down on the sofa be- 
side Prince Andrew. 

"With Natdsha Rost6va, yes?" said he. 

"Yes, yes! Who else should it be? I should 
never have believed it, but the feel ing is strong- 
er than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and 
suffered, but I would not exchange even that 
torment for anything in the world, I have not 
lived till now. At last I live, but I can't live 
without her! But can she love me? ... I am too 
old for her. . . . Why don't you speak?" 

"I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre sud- 
denly, rising and beginning to pace up and 
down the room. "I always thought it. ... That 
girl is such a treasure . . . she is a rare girl. . . . 
My dear friend, I entreat you, don't philoso- 
phize, don't doubt, marry, marry, marry. . . . 
And I am sure there will not be a happier man 
than you." 

"But what of her?" 

"She loves you." 

"Don't talk rubbish . . ." said Prince An- 
drew, smiling and looking into Pierre's eyes. 

"She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely. 

"But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, 
holding him by the arm. "Do you know the 
condition I am in? I must talk about it to some- 
one." 

"Well, go on, go on. I am very glad," said 
Pierre, and his face really changed, his brow be- 
came smooth, and he listened gladly to Prince 
Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, 
quite a different, quite a new man. Where was 
his spleen, his contempt for life, his disillusion- 
ment? Pierre was the only person to whom he 
made up his mind to speak openly; and to him 
he told all that was in his soul. Now he boldly 
and lightly made plans for an extended future, 
said he could not sacrifice his own happiness to 
his father's caprice, and spoke of how he would 
either make his father consent to this marriage 
and love her, or would do without his consent; 
then he marveled at the feeling that had mas- 
tered him as at something strange, apart from 
and independent of himself. 

"1 should not have believed anyone who 
told me that I was capable of such love," said 
Prince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feel- 
ing that I knew in the past. The whole world is 
now for me divided into two halves: one half 
is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: the oth- 
er half is everything where she is not, and there 



SIX 267 

all is gloom and darkness. . . ." 

"Darkness and gloom," reiterated Pierre: 
"yes, yes, I understand that." 

"I cannot help loving the light, it is not my 
fault. And I am very happy! You understand 
me? I know you are glad for my sake." 

"Yes, yes," Pierre assented, looking at his 
friend with a touched and sad expression in 
his eyes. The brighter Prince Andrew's lot ap- 
peared to him, the gloomier seemed his own. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

PRINCE ANDREW needed his father's consent to 
his marriage, and to obtain this he started for 
the country next day. 

His father received his son's communication 
with external composure, but inward wrath. 
He could not comprehend how anyone could 
wish to alter his life or introduce anythingnew 
into it, when his own life was already ending. 
"If only they would let me end my days as I 
want to," thought the old man, "then they 
might do as they please." With his son, how- 
ever, he employed the diplomacy he reserved 
for important occasions and, adopting a quiet 
tone, discussed the whole matter. 

In the first place the marriage was not a bril- 
liant one as regards birth, wealth, or rank. 
Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as 
young as he had been and his health was poor 
(the old man laid special stress on this), while 
she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son 
whom it would be a pity to entrust to a chit of 
a girl. "Fourthly and finally," the father said, 
looking ironically at his son, "I beg you to put 
it off for a year: go abroad, take a cure, look 
out as you wanted to for a German tutor for 
Prince Nicholas. Then if your love or passion 
or obstinacy as you please is still as great, 
marry! And that's my last word on it. Mind, 
the last! . . ." concluded the prince, in a tone 
which showed that nothing would make him 
alter his decision. 

Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man 
hoped that his feelings, or his fianceVs, would 
not stand a year's test, or that he (the old prince 
himself) would die before then, and he de- 
cided to conform to his father's wishto pro- 
pose, and postpone the wedding for a year. 

Three weeks after the last evening he had 
spent with the Rost6vs, Prince Andrew re- 
turned to Petersburg. 

Next day after her talk with her mother Na- 
tdsha expected Bolk6nski all day, but he did 
not come. On the second and third day it was 



268 



WAR AND PEACE 



the same. Pierre did not come either and Na- 
tdsha, not knowing that Prince Andrew had 
gone to see his father, could not explain his ab- 
sence to herself. 

Three weeks passed in this way. Natdsha 
had no desire to go out any where and wandered 
from room to room like a shadow, idle and list- 
less; she wept secretly at night and did not go 
to her mother in the evenings. She blushed 
continually and was irritable. It seemed to her 
that everybody knew about her disappoint- 
ment and was laughing at her and pitying her. 
Strong as was her inward grief, this wound to 
her vanity intensified her misery. 

Once she came to her mother, tried to say 
something, and suddenly began to cry. Her 
tears were those of an offended child who does 
not know why it is being punished. 

The countess began to soothe Natdsha, who 
after first listening to her mother's words, sud- 
denly interrupted her: 

"Leave off, Mamma! I don't think, and don't 
want to think about ill He just came and then 
left off, left off. ..." 

Her voice trembled, and she again nearly 
cried, but recovered and went on quietly: 

"And I don't at all want to get married. And 
I am afraid of him; I have now become quite 
calm, quite calm." 

The day after this conversation Natdsha put 
on the old dress which she knew had the pecul- 
iar property of conducing to cheerfulness in 
the mornings, and that day she returned to the 
old way of life which she had abandoned since 
the ball. Having finished her morning tea she 
went to the ballroom, which she particularly 
liked for its loud resonance, and began singing 
her solfeggio. When she had finished her first 
exercise she stood still in the middle of the 
room and sang a musical phrase that particu- 
larly pleased her. She listened joyfully (as 
though she had not expected it) to the charm 
of the notes reverberating, filling the whole 
empty ballroom, and slowly dying away; and 
all at once she felt cheerful. "What's the good 
of making so much of it? Things are nice as it 
is," she said to herself, and she began walking 
up and down the room, not stepping simply 
on the resounding parquet but treading with 
each step from the heel to the toe (she had on 
a new and favorite pair of shoes) and listening 
to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the 
toe as gladly as she had to the sounds of her 
own voice. Passing a mirror she glanced into 
it. "There, that's mel" the expression of her 
face seemed to say as she caught sight of her- 



self. "Well, and very nice too! I need nobody." 

A footman wanted to come in to clear away 
something in the room but she would not let 
him, and having closed the door behind him 
continued her walk. That morning she had re- 
turned to her favorite moodlove of, and de- 
light in, herself. "How charming that Natdsha 
isl" she said again, speaking as some third, col- 
lective, male person. "Pretty, a good voice, 
young, and in nobody's way if only they leave 
her in peace." But however much they left her 
in peace she could not now be at peace, and im- 
mediately felt this. 

In the hall the porch door opened, and some- 
one asked, "At home?" and then footsteps were 
heard. Natdsha was looking at the mirror, but 
did not see herself. She listened to the sounds 
in the hall. When she saw herself, her face was 
pale. It was he. She knew this for certain, 
though she hardly heard his voice through the 
closed doors. 

Pale and agitated, Natasha ran into the draw- 
ing room. 

"Mamma! Bolk6nski has come!" she said. 
"Mamma, it is awful, it is unbearable! I don't 
want ... to be tormented! What am I to 
do? . . ." 

Before the countess could answer, Prince 
Andrew entered the room with an agitated and 
serious face. As soon as he saw Natdsha his face 
brightened. He kissed the countess' hand and 
Natasha's, and sat down beside the sofa. 

"It is long since we had the pleasure . . ." be- 
gan the countess, but Prince Andrew inter- 
rupted her by answering her intended ques- 
tion, obviously in haste to say what he had to. 

"I have not been to see you all this time be- 
cause I have been at my father's. I had to talk 
over a very important matter with him. I only 
got back last night," he said glancing at Na- 
tdsha; "I want to have a talk with you, Count- 
ess," he added after a moment's pause. 

The countess lowered her eyes, sighing 
deeply. 

"I am at your disposal," she murmured. 

Natdsha knew that she ought to go away, 
but was unable to do so: something gripped 
her throat, and regardlessof manners she stared 
straight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes. 

"At once? This instant! . . . No, it can't be!" 
she thought. 

Again he glanced at her, and that glance con- 
vinced her that she was not mistaken. Yes, at 
once, that very instant, her fate would be de- 
cided. 

"Go, Natasha! I will call you," said the 

