BOOK SIX 



269 



countess in a whisper. 

Natasha glanced with frightened imploring 
eyes at Prince Andrew and at her mother and 
went out. 

"I have come, Countess, to ask for your 
daughter's hand," said Prince Andrew. 

The countess* face flushed hotly, but she 
said nothing. 

"Your offer . . ." she began at last sedately. 
He remained silent, looking into her eyes. 
"Your offer . . ." (she grew confused) "is agree- 
able to us, and ... I accept your offer. I am 
glad. And my husband ... I hope . . . but it will 
depend on her. . . ." 

"I will speak to her when I have your con- 
sent Do you give it to me?" said Prince An- 
drew. 

"Yes," replied the countess. She held out her 
hand to him, and with a mixed feeling of es- 
trangement and tenderness pressed her lips to 
his forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. 
She wished to love him as a son, but felt that to 
her he was a stranger and a terrifying man. "I 
am sure my husband will consent," said the 
countess, "but your father . . ." 

"My father, to whom I have told my plans, 
has made it an express condition of his consent 
that the wedding is not to take place for a year. 
And I wished to tell you of that," said Prince 
Andrew. 

"It is true that Natasha is still young, but 
so long as that? . . ." 

"It is unavoidable," said Prince Andrew with 
a sigh. 

"I will send her to you," said the countess, 
and left the room. 

"Lord have mercy upon usl" she repeated 
while seeking her daughter. 

S6nya said that Natasha was in her bedroom. 
Natasha was sitting on the bed, pale and dry- 
eyed, and was gazing at the icons and whisper- 
ing something as she rapidly crossed herself. 
Seeing her mother she jumped up and flew to 
her. 

"Well, Mamma? . . . Well? . . ." 

"Go, go to him. He is asking for your hand," 
said the countess, coldly it seemed to Natasha. 
"Go . . . go," said the mother, sadly and re- 
proachfully, with a deep sigh, as her daughter 
ran away. 

Natasha never remembered how she entered 
the drawing room. When she came in and saw 
him she paused. "Is it possible that this stranger 
has now become everything to me?" she asked 
herself, and immediately answered," Yes, every- 
thingl He alone is now dearer to me than every- 



thing in the world." Prince Andrew came up 
to her with downcast eyes. 

"I have loved you from the very first mo- 
ment I saw you. May I hope?" 

He looked at her and was struck by the seri- 
ous impassioned expression of her face. Her 
face said: "Why ask? Why doubt what you can- 
not but know? Why speak, when words cannot 
express what one feels?" 

She drew near to him and stopped. He took 
her hand and kissed it. 

"Do you love me?" 

"Yes, yes!" Natasha murmured as if in vexa- 
tion. Then she sighed loudly and, catching her 
breath more and more quickly, began to sob. 

"What is it? What's the matter?" 

"Oh, I am so happy!" she replied, smiled 
through her tears, bent over closer to him, 
paused for an instant as if asking herself wheth- 
er she might, and then kissed him. 

Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into 
her eyes, and did not find in his heart his former 
love for her. Something in him had suddenly 
changed; there was no longer the former poetic 
and mystic charm of desire, but there was pity 
for her feminine and childish weakness, fear 
at her devotion and trustfulness, and an op- 
pressive yet joyful sense of the duty that now 
bound him to her forever. The present feeling, 
though not so bright and poetic as the former, 
was stronger and more serious. 

"Did your mother tell you that it cannot be 
for a year?" asked Prince Andrew, still looking 
into her eyes. 

"Is it possible that I the 'chit of a girl,' as 
everybody called me," thought Natdsha "is it 
possible that I am now to be the wife and the 
equal of this strange, dear, clever man whom 
even my father looks up to? Can it be true? 
Can it be true that there can be no more play- 
ing with life, that now I am grown up, that on 
me now lies a responsibility for my every word 
and deed? Yes, but what did he ask me?" 

"No," she replied, but she had not under- 
stood his question. 

"Forgive mel" he said. "But you areso young, 
and I have already been through so much in 
life. I am afraid for you, you do not yet know 
yourself." 

Natasha listened wtih concentrated atten- 
tion, trying but failing to take in the meaning 
of his words. 

"Hard as this year which delays my happi- 
ness will be," continued Prince Andrew, "it 
will give you time to be sure of yourself. I ask 
you to make me happy in a year, but you are 



270 



WAR AND PEACE 



free: our engagement shall remain a secret, 
and should you find that you do not love me, 
or should you come to love ..." said Prince 
Andrew with an unnatural smile. 

"Why do you say that?" Natdsha interrupted 
him. "You know that from the very day you 
first came to Otrddnoe I have loved you," she 
cried, quite convinced that she spoke the truth. 

"In a year you will learn to know your- 
self. . . ." 

"A whole year!" Natasha repeated suddenly, 
only now realizing that the marriage was to be 
postponed for a year. "But why a year? Why a 
year? . . ." 

Prince Andrew began to explain to her the 
reasons for this delay. Natasha did not hear 
him. 

"And can't it be helped?" she asked. Prince 
Andrew did not reply, but his face expressed 
the impossibility of altering that decision. 

"It's awful! Oh, it's awful! awful!" Natdsha 
suddenly cried, and again burst into sobs. "I 
shall die, waiting a year: it's impossible, it's aw- 
ful!" She looked into her lover's face and saw 
in it a look of commiseration and perplexity. 

"No, no! I'll do anything!" she said, sudden- 
ly checking her tears. "I am so happy." 

The father and mother came into the room 
and gave the betrothed couple their blessing. 

From that day Prince Andrew began to fre- 
quent the Rost6vs' as Natdsha's affianced lover. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

No BETROTHAL CEREMONY took place and Na- 
tdsha's engagement to Bolk6nski was not an- 
nounced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He 
said that as he was responsible for the delay he 
ought to bear the whole burden of it; that he 
had given his word and bound himself forever, 
but that he did not wish to bind Natdsha and 
gave her perfect freedom. If after six months 
she felt that she did not love him she would 
have full right to reject him. Naturally neither 
Natasha nor her parents wished to hear of this, 
but Prince Andrew was firm. He came every 
day to the Rost6vs', but did not behave to Na- 
tdsha as an affianced lover: he did not use the 
familiar thou, but said you to her, and kissed 
only her hand. After their engagement, quite 
different, intimate, and natural relations sprang 
up between them. It was as if they had not 
known each other till now. Both liked to re- 
call how they had regarded each other when 
as yet they were nothing to one another; they 
felt themselves now quite different beings: 
then they were artificial, now natural and sin- 



cere. At first the family felt some constraint in 
intercourse with Prince Andrew; he seemed a 
man from another world, and for a long time 
Natdsha trained the family to get used to him, 
proudly assuring them all that he only ap- 
peared to be different, but was really just like 
all of them, and that she was not afraid of him 
and no one else ought to be. After a few days 
they grew accustomed to him, and without re- 
straint in his presence pursued their usual way 
of life, in which he took his part. He could talk 
about rural economy with the count, fashions 
with the countess and Natdsha, and about al- 
bums and fancywork with S6nya. Sometimes 
the household both among themselves and in 
his presence expressed their wonder at how it 
had all happened, and at the evident omens 
there had been of it: Prince Andrew's coming 
to Otrddnoe and their coming to Petersburg, 
and the likeness between Natdsha and Prince 
Andrew which her nurse had noticed on his 
first visit, and Andrew's encounter with Nich- 
olas in 1805, and many other incidents beto- 
kening that it had to be. 

In the house that poetic dullness and quiet 
reigned which always accompanies the pres- 
ence of a betrothed couple. Often when all sit- 
ting together everyone kept silent. Sometimes 
the others would get up and go away and the 
couple, left alone, still remained silent. They 
rarely spoke of their future life. Prince An- 
drew was afraid and ashamed to speak of it. 
Natdsha shared this as she did all his feelings, 
which she constantly divined. Once she began 
questioning him about his son. Prince Andrew 
blushed, as he often did now Natdsha particu- 
larly liked it in him and said that his son 
would not live with them. 

"Why not?" asked Natdsha in a frightened 
tone. 

"I cannot take him away from his grand- 
father, and besides . . ." 

"How I should have loved him!" said Na- 
tdsha, immediately guessing his thought; "but 
I know you wish to avoid any pretext for find- 
ing fault with us." 

Sometimes the old count would come up, 
kiss Prince Andrew, and ask his advice about 
Pe* tya's education or Nicholas' service. The old 
countess sighed as she looked at them; S6nya 
was always getting frightened lest she should 
be in the way and tried to find excuses for leav- 
ing them alone, even when they did not wish 
it. When Prince Andrew spoke (he could tell 
a story very well), Natdsha listened to him with 
pride; when she spoke she noticed with fear 



BOOK SIX 



271 



and joy that he gazed attentively and scruti- 
nizingly at her. She asked herself in perplexity: 
"What does he look for in me? He is trying to 
discover something by looking at me! What if 
what he seeks in me is not there?" Sometimes 
she fell into one of the mad, merry moods char- 
acteristic of her, and then she particularly loved 
to hear and see how Prince Andrew laughed. 
He seldom laughed, but when he did he aban- 
doned himself entirely to his laughter, and aft- 
er such a laugh she always felt nearer to him. 
Natdsha would have been completely happy if 
the thought of the separation awaiting her and 
drawing near had not terrified her, just as the 
mere thought of it made him turn pale and 
cold. 

On the eve of his departure from Petersburg 
Prince Andrew brought with him Pierre, who 
had not been to the Rostovs' once since the 
ball. Pierre seemed disconcerted and embar- 
rassed. He was talking to the countess, and Na- 
tdsha sat down beside a little chess table with 
S6nya, thereby inviting Prince Andrew to come 
too. He did so. 

"You have known Bezukhov a long time?" 
he asked. "Do you like him?" 

"Yes, he's a dear, but very absurd." 

And as usual when speaking of Pierre, she 
began to tell anecdotes of his absent-minded- 
ness, some of which had even been invented 
about him. 

"Do you know I have entrusted him with our 
secret? I have known him from childhood. He 
has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie," Prince 
Andrew said with sudden seriousness "I am 
going away and heaven knows what may hap- 
pen. You may cease to ... all right, I know I 
am not to say that. Only this, then: whatever 
may happen to you when I am not here . . ." 

"What can happen?" 

"Whatever trouble may come," Prince An- 
drew continued, "I beg you, Mademoiselle 
Sophie, whatever may happen, to turn to him 
alone for advice and helpl He is a most absent- 
minded and absurd fellow, but he has a heart 
of gold." 

Neither her father, nor her mother, nor S6n- 
ya, nor Prince Andrew himself could have fore- 
seen how the separation from her lover would 
act on Natdsha. Flushed and agitated she went 
about the house all that day, dry-eyed, occupied 
with most trivial matters as if not understand- 
ing what awaited her. She did not even cry 
when, on taking leave, he kissed her hand for 
the last time. "Don't gol" she said in a tone 
that made him wonder whether he really ought 



not to stay and which he remembered long aft- 
erwards. Nor did she cry when he was gone; 
but for several days she sat in her room dry- 
eyed, taking no interest in anything and only 
saying now and then, "Oh, why did he go 



But a fortnight after his departure, to the 
surprise of those around her, she recovered 
from her mental sickness just as suddenly and 
became her old self again, but with a change 
in her moral physiognomy, as a child gets up 
after a long illness with a changed expression 
of face. 

CHAPTER XXV 

DURING THAT YEAR after his son's departure, 
Prince Nicholas Bolk6nski's health and temper 
became much worse. He grew still more irri- 
table, and it was Princess Mary who generally 
bore the brunt of his frequent fits of unpro- 
voked anger. He seemed carefully to seek out 
her tender spots so as to torture her mentally 
as harshly as possible. Princess Mary had two 
passions and consequently two joys her neph- 
ew, little Nicholas, and religion and these 
were the favorite subjects of the prince's at- 
tacks and ridicule. Whatever was spoken of he 
would bring round to the superstitiousness of 
old maids, or the petting and spoiling of chil- 
dren. "You want to make him" little Nicholas 
"into an old maid like yourselfl A pity! 
Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old 
maid," he would say. Or, turning to Mademoi- 
selle Bourienne, he would ask her in Princess 
Mary's presence how she liked our village 
priests and icons and would joke about them. 

He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelings 
and tormented her, but it cost her no effort to 
forgive him. Could he be to blame toward her, 
or could her father, whom she knew loved her 
in spite of it all, be unjust? And what is justice? 
The princess never thought of that proud word 
"justice." All the complex laws of man cen- 
tered for her in one clear and simple law the 
law of love and self-sacrifice taught us by Him 
who lovingly suffered for mankind though He 
Himself was God. What had she to do with 
the justice or injustice of other people? She 
had to endure and love, and that she did. 

During the winter Prince Andrew had come 
to Bald Hills and had been gay, gentle, and 
more affectionate than Princess Mary had 
known him for a long time past. She felt that 
something had happened to him, but he said 
nothing to her about his love. Before he left he 
had a long talk with his father about some- 



WAR AND PEACE 



thing, and Princess Mary noticed that before 
his departure they were dissatisfied with one 
another. 

Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Prin- 
cess Mary wrote to her friend Julie Karagina 
in Petersburg, whom she had dreamed (as aB 
girls dream) of marrying to her brother, and 
who was at that time in mourning for her own 
brother, killed in Turkey. 

Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, 
tender friend Julie. 

Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it 
to myself as a special providence of God who, lov- 
ing you, wishes to try you and your excellent 
mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion 
alone, canI will not say comfort us but save us 
from despair. Religion alone can explain to us 
what without its help man cannot comprehend: 
why, for what cause, kind and noble beings able 
to find happiness in lifenot merely harming no 
one but necessary to the happiness of others are 
called away to God, while cruel, useless, harmful 
persons, or such as are a burden to themselves and 
to others, are left living. The first death I saw, 
and one I shall never forget that of my dear sis- 
ter-in-lawleft that impression on me. Just as you 
ask destiny why your splendid brother had to die, 
so I asked why that angel Lise, who not only never 
wronged anyone, but in whose soul there were 
never any unkind thoughts, had to die. And what 
do you think, dear friend? Five years have passed 
since then, and already I, with my petty under- 
standing, begin to see clearly why she had to die, 
and in what way that death was but an expression 
of the infinite goodness of the Creator, whose 
every action, though generally incomprehensible 
to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite love 
for His creatures. Perhaps, I often think, she was 
too angelically innocent to have the strength to 
perform all a mother's duties. As a young wife she 
was irreproachable; perhaps she could not have 
been so as a mother. As it is, not only has she left 
us, and particularly Prince Andrew, with the pur- 
est regrets and memories, but probably she will 
there receive a place I dare not hope for myself. 
But not to speak of her alone, that early and ter- 
rible death has had the most beneficent influence 
on me and on my brother in spite of all our grief. 
Then, at the moment of our loss, these thoughts 
could not occur to me; I should then have dis- 
missed them with horror, but now they are very 
dear and certain. I write all this to you, dear 
friend, only to convince you of the Gospel truth 
which has become for me a principle of life: not 
a single hair of our heads will fall without His 
will. And His will is governed only by infinite love 
for us, and so whatever befalls us is for our good. 

You ask whether we shall spend next winter in 
Moscow. In spite of my wish to see you, I do not 
think so and do not want to do so. You will be sur- 
prised to hear that the reason for this is Buona- 



parte! The case is this: my father's health is grow- 
ing noticeably worse, he cannot stand any contra- 
diction and is becoming irritable. This irritability 
is, as you know, chiefly directed to political ques- 
tions. He cannot endure the notion that Buona- 
parte is negotiating on equal terms with all the 
sovereigns of Europe and particularly with our 
own, the grandson of the Great Catherine! As you 
know, I am quite indifferent to politics, but from 
my father's remarks and his talks with Michael 
Ivanovich I know all that goes on in the world 
and especially about the honors conferred on 
Buonaparte, who only at Bald Hills in the whole 
world, it seems, is not accepted as a great man, 
still less as Emperor of France. And my father can- 
not stand this. It seems to me that it is chiefly 
because of his political views that my father is re- 
luctant to speak of going to Moscow; for he fore- 
sees the encounters that would result from his way 
of expressing his views regardless of anybody. All 
the benefit he might derive from a course of treat- 
ment he would lose as a result of the disputes 
about Buonaparte which would be inevitable. In 
any case it will be decided very shortly. 

Our family life goes on in the old way except 
for my brother Andrew's absence. He, as I wrote 
you before, has changed very much of late. After 
liis sorrow he only this year quite recovered his 
spirits. He has again become as I used to know 
him when a child: kind, affectionate, with that 
heart of gold to which I know no equal. He has 
realized, it seems to me, that life is not over for 
him. But together with this mental change he has 
grown physically much weaker. He has become 
thinner and more nervous. I am anxious about 
him and glad he is taking this trip abroad which 
the doctors recommended long ago. I hope it will 
cure him. You write that in Petersburg he is 
spoken of as one of the most active, cultivated, and 
capable of the young men. Forgive my vanity as a 
relation, but I never doubted it. The good he has 
done to everybody here, from his peasants up to 
the gentry, is incalculable. On his arrival in Peters- 
burg he received only his due. I always wonder at 
the way rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow, es- 
pecially such false ones as that you write about I 
mean the report of my brother's betrothal to the 
little Rostova. I do not think my brother will ever 
marry again, and certainly not her; and this is 
why: first, I know that though he rarely speaks 
about the wife he has lost, the grief of that loss has 
gone too deep in his heart for him ever to decide 
to give her a successor and our little angel a step- 
mother. Secondly because, as far as I know, that 
girl is not the kind of girl who could please Prince 
Andrew. I do not think he would choose her for a 
wife, and frankly I do not wish it. But I am run- 
ning on too long and am at the end of my second 
sheet. Good-by, my dear friend. May God keep 
you in His holy and mighty care. My dear friend, 
Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses. 

MARY 



BOOK SIX 



273 



CHAPTER XXVI 

IN THE MIDDLE of the summer Princess Mary re- 
ceived an unexpected letter from Prince An- 
drew in Switzerland in which he gave her 
strange and surprising news. He informed her 
of his engagement to Natasha Rostova. The 
whole letter breathed loving rapture for his 
betrothed and tender and confiding affection 
for his sister. He wrote that he had never loved 
as he did now and that only now did he under- 
stand and know what life was. He asked his 
sister to forgive him for not having told her of 
his resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills, 
though he had spoken of it to his father. He 
had not done so for fear Princess Mary should 
ask her father to give his consent, irritating 
him and having to bear the brunt of his dis- 
pleasure without attaining her object. "Be- 
sides," he wrote, "the matter was not then so 
definitely settled as it is now. My father then 
insisted on a delay of a year and now already 
six months, half of that period, have passed, 
and my resolution is firmer than ever. If the 
doctors did not keep me here at the spas I 
should be back in Russia, but as it is I have to 
postpone my return for three months. You 
know me and my relations with Father. I want 
nothing from him. I have been and always 
shall be independent; but to go against his will 
and arouse his anger, now that he may perhaps 
remain with us such a short time, would de- 
stroy half my happiness. I am now writing to 
him about the same question, and beg you to 
choose a good moment to hand him the let- 
ter and to let me know how he looks at the 
whole matter and whether there is hope that 
he may consent to reduce the term by four 
months." 

After long hesitations, doubts, and prayers, 
Princess Mary gave the letter to her father. The 
next day the old prince said to her quietly: 

"Write and tell your brother to wait till I 
am dead. ... It won't be long I shall soon set 
him free." 

The princess was about to reply, but her fa- 
ther would not let her speak and, raising his 
voice more and more, cried: 

"Marry, marry, my boy! ... A good family I 
. . . Clever people, eh? Rich, eh? Yes, a nice 
stepmother little Nicholas will havel Write 
and tell him that he may marry tomorrow if he 
likes. She will be little Nicholas' stepmother 
and I'll marry Bouriennel . . . Ha, ha, hal He 
mustn't be without a stepmother either! Only 
one thing, no more women are wanted in my 
house let him marry and live by himself. Per- 



haps you will go and live with him too?" he 
added, turning to Princess Mary. "Go in heav- 
en's name! Go out into the frost . . . the frost 
... the frost!" 

After this outburst the prince did not speak 
any more about the matter. But repressed vex- 
ation at his son's poor-spirited behavior found 
expression in his treatment of his daughter. 
To his former pretexts for irony a fresh one 
was now added allusions to stepmothers and 
amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne. 

"Why shouldn't I marry her?" he asked his 
daughter. "She'll make a splendid princess!" 

And latterly, to her surprise and bewilder- 
ment, Princess Mary noticed that her father was 
really associating more and more with the 
Frenchwoman. She wrote to Prince Andrew 
about the reception of his letter, but comforted 
him with hopes of reconciling their father to 
the idea. 

Little Nicholas and his education, herbroth- 
er Andrew, and religion were Princess Mary's 
joys and consolations; but besides that, since 
everyone must have personal hopes, Princess 
Mary in the profoundest depths of her heart 
had a hidden dream and hope that supplied 
the chief consolation of her life. This comfort- 
ing dream and hope were given her by God's 
folk the half-witted and other pilgrims who 
visited her without the prince's knowledge. 
The longer she lived, the more experience and 
observation she had of life, the greater was her 
wonder at the shortsightedness of men who seek 
enjoyment and happiness here on earth: toil- 
ing, suffering, struggling, and harming one an- 
other, to obtain that impossible, visionary, sin- 
ful happiness. Prince Andrew had loved his 
wife, she died, but that was riot enough: he 
wanted to bind his happiness to another wom- 
an. Her father objected to this because he 
wanted a more distinguished and wealthier 
match for Andrew. And they all struggled and 
suffered and tormented one another and in- 
jured their souls, their eternal souls, for the at- 
tainment of benefits which endure but for an 
instant. Not only do we know this ourselves, 
but Christ, the Son of God, came down to earth 
and told us that this life is but for a moment 
and is a probation; yet we cling to it and think 
to find happiness in it. "How is it that no one 
realizes this?" thought Princess Mary. "No one 
except these despised God's folk who, wallet 
on back, come to me by the back door, afraid 
of being seen by the prince, not for fear of ill- 
usage by him but for fear of causing him to sin. 
To leave family, home, and all the cares of 



*74 



WAR AND PEACE 



worldly welfare, in order without clinging to 
anything to wander in hempen rags from place 
to place under an assumed name, doing no one 
any harm but praying for all for those who 
drive one away as well as for those who pro- 
tect one: higher than that life and truth there 
is no life or truth!" 

There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked 
little woman of fifty called Theodosia, who for 
over thirty years had gone about barefoot and 
worn heavy chains. Princess Mary was particu- 
larly fond of her. Once, when in a room with a 
lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was 
talking of her life, the thought that Theodosia 
alone had found the true path of life suddenly 
came to Princess Mary with such force that she 
resolved to become a pilgrim herself. When 
Theodosia had gone to sleep Princess Mary 
thought about this for a long time, and at last 
made up her mind that, strange as it might 
seem, she must go on a pilgrimage. She dis- 
closed this thought to no one but to her con- 
fessor, Father Akfnfi, the monk, and he ap- 
proved of her intention. Under guise of a pres- 
ent for the pilgrims, Princess Mary prepared 
a pilgrim's complete costume for herself: a 
coarse smock, bast shoes, a rough coat, and a 
black kerchief. Often, approaching the chest 
of drawers containing this secret treasure, Prin- 



cess Mary paused, uncertain whether the time 
had not already come to put her project into 
execution. 

Often, listening to the pilgrims' tales, she 
was so stimulated by their simple speech, me- 
chanical to them but to her so full of deep 
meaning, that several times she was on the 
point of abandoning everything and running 
away from home. In imagination she already 
pictured herself by Theodosia's side, dressed in 
coarse rags, walking with a staff, a wallet on 
her back, along the dusty road, directing her 
wanderings from one saint's shrine to another, 
free from envy, earthly love, or desire, and 
reaching at last the place where there is no 
more sorrow or sighing, but eternal joy and 
bliss. 

"I shall come to a place and pray there, and 
before having time to get used to it or getting 
to love it, I shall go farther. I will go on till my 
legs fail, and I'll lie down and die somewhere, 
and shall at last reach that eternal, quiet ha- 
ven, where there is neither sorrow nor sighing 
..." thought Princess Mary. 

But afterwards, when she saw her father and 
especially little Koko (Nicholas), her resolve 
weakened. She wept quietly, and felt that she 
was a sinner who loved her father and little 
nephew more than God. 



Book Seven: 1810-11 



CHAPTER I 

THE BIBLE LEGEND tells us that the absence of 
laboridleness was a condition of the first 
man's blessedness before the Fall. Fallen man 
has retained a love of idleness, but the curse 
weighs on the race not only because we have to 
seek our bread in the sweat of our brows, but 
because our moral nature is such that we can- 
not be both idle and at ease. An inner voice 
tells us we are in the wrong if we are idle. If 
man could find a state in which he felt that 
though idle he was fulfilling his duty, he would 
have found one of the conditions of man's 
primitive blessedness. And such a state of obli- 
gatory and irreproachable idleness is the lot of 
a whole class the military. The chief attrac- 
tion of military service has consisted and will 
consist in this compulsory and irreproachable 
idleness. 

Nicholas Rost6v experienced this blissful 
condition to the full when, after 1807, he con- 
tinued to serve in the Pdvlograd regiment, in 
which he already commanded the squadron he 
had taken over from Denfsov. 

Rost6v had become a bluff, good-natured 
fellow, whom his Moscow acquaintances would 
have considered rather bad form, but who was 
liked and respected by his comrades, subordi- 
nates, and superiors, and was well contented 
with his life. Of late, in 1809, he found in let- 
ters from home more frequent complaints from 
his mother that their affairs were falling into 
greater and greater disorder, and that it was 
time for him to come back to gladden and com- 
fort his old parents. 

Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread 
of their wanting to take him away from sur- 
roundings in which, protected from all the en- 
tanglements of life, he was living so calmly and 
quietly. He felt that sooner or later he would 
have to re-enter that whirlpool of life, with its 
embarrassments and affairs to be straightened 
out, its accounts with stewards, quarrels, and 
intrigues, its ties, society, and with S6nya's love 
and his promise to her. It was all dreadfully 



difficult and complicated; and he replied to his 
mother in cold, formal letters in French, begin- 
ning: "My dear Mamma," and ending: "Your 
obedient son," which said nothing of when he 
would return. In 1810 he received letters from 
his parents, in which they told him of Natasha's 
engagement to Bolk6nski, and that the wed- 
ding would be in a year's time because the old 
prince made difficulties. This letter grieved 
and mortified Nicholas. In the first place he 
was sorry that Natdsha, for whom he cared 
more than for anyone else in the family, should 
be lost to the home; and secondly, from his 
hussar point of view, he regretted not to have 
been there to show that fellow Bolk6nski that 
connection with him was no such great honor 
after all, and that if he loved Natdsha he might 
dispense with permission from his dotard fa- 
ther. For a moment he hesitated whether he 
should not apply for leave in order to see Na- 
tdsha before she was married, but then came 
the maneuvers, and considerations about S6n- 
ya and about the confusion of their affairs, and 
Nicholas again put it off. But in the spring of 
that year, he received a letter from his mother, 
written without his father's knowledge, and 
that letter persuaded him to return. She wrote 
that if he did not come and take matters in 
hand, their whole property would be sold by 
auction and they would all have to go begging. 
The count was so weak, and trusted Mftenka 
so much, and was so good-natured, that every- 
body took advantage of him and things were 
going from bad to worse. "For God's sake, I 
implore you, come at once if you do not wish 
to make me and the whole family wretched," 
wrote the countess. 

This letter touched Nicholas. He had that 
common sense of a matter-of-fact man which 
showed him what he ought to do. 

The right thing now was, if not to retire 
from the service, at any rate to go home on 
leave. Why he had to go he did not know; but 
after his after-dinner nap he gave orders to 
saddle Mars, an extremely vicious gray stallion, 



*75 



276 

that had not been ridden for a long time, and 
when he returned with the horse all in a lather, 
he informed Lavriishka (Denfsov's servant 
who had remained with him) and his comrades 
who turned up in the evening that he was ap- 
plying for leave and was going home. Difficult 
and strange as it was for him to reflect that he 
would go away without having heard from the 
staff and this interested him extremely 
whether he was promoted to a captaincy or 
would receive the Order of St. Anne for the 
last maneuvers; strange as it was to think that 
he would go away without having sold his three 
roans to the Polish Count Golukhovski, who 
was bargaining for the horses Rost6v had 
betted he would sell for two thousand rubles; 
incomprehensible as it seemed that the ball 
the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish 
Mademoiselle Przazdziecka (out of rivalry to 
the Uhlans who had given one in honor of 
their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would 
take place without him he knew he must go 
away from this good, bright world to some- 
where where everything was stupid and con- 
fused. A week later he obtained his leave. His 
hussar comrades not only those of his own 
regiment, but the whole brigade gave Rostov 
a dinner to which the subscription was fifteen 
rubles a head, and at which there were two 
bands and two choirs of singers. Rost6v danced 
the Trepak with Major Basov; the tipsy officers 
tossed, embraced, and dropped RostcW; the 
soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, 
and shouted "hurrah!" and then they put him 
in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first 
post station. 

During the first half of the journey from 
Kremenchug to Kiev all Rost6v's thoughts, as 
is usual in such cases, were behind him, with the 
squadron; but when he had gone more than 
halfway he began to forget his three roans and 
Dozhoyve*yko, his quartermaster, and to won- 
der anxiously how things would be at Otrad- 
noe and what he would find there. Thoughts 
of home grew stronger the nearer he approached 
it far stronger, as though this feeling of his 
was subject to the law by which the force of at- 
traction is in inverse proportion to the square 
of the distance. At the last post station before 
Otrddnoe he gave the driver a three-ruble tip, 
and on arriving he ran breathlessly, like a boy, 
up the steps of his home. 

After the rapture of meeting, and after that 
odd feeling of unsatisfied expectation the 
feeling that "everything is just the same, so 



WAR AND PEACE 

down in his old home world. His father and 
mother were much the same, only a little older. 
What was new in them was a certain uneasi- 
ness and occasional discord, which there used 
not to be, and which, as Nicholas soon found 
out, was due to the bad state of their affairs. 
S6nya was nearly twenty; she had stopped 
growing prettier and promised nothing more 
than she was already, but that was enough. 
She exhaled happiness and love from the time 
Nicholas returned, and the faithful, unalter- 
able love of this girl had a gladdening effect on 
hirn. P(kya and Natasha surprised Nicholas 
most. Pc"tya was a big handsome boy of thir- 
teen, merry, witty, and mischievous, with a 
voice that was already breaking. As for Nata- 
sha, for a long while Nicholas wondered and 
laughed whenever he looked at her. 

"You're not the same at all," he said. 

"How? Am I uglier?" 

"On the contrary, but what dignityl A prin- 
cess!" he whispered to her. 

"Yes,. yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully. 

She told him about her romance with Prince 
Andrew and of his visit to Otrddnoe and 
showed him his last letter. 

"Well, are you glad?" Natdsha asked. "I am 
so tranquil and happy now." 

"Very glad," answered Nicholas. "He is an 

excellent fellow And are you very much in 

love?" 

"How shall I put it?" replied Natdsha. "I 
was in love with Boris, with my teacher, and 
with Denisov, but this is quite different. I feel 
at peace and settled. I know that no better 
man than he exists, and I am calm and con- 
tented now. Not at all as before." 

Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the 
postponement of the marriage for a year; but 
Natdsha attacked her brother with exaspera- 
tion, proving to him that it could not be oth- 
erwise, and that it would be a bad thing to en- 
ter a family against the father's will, and that 
she herself wished it so. 

"You don't at all understand/' she said. 

Nicholas was silent and agreed with her. 

Her brother often wondered as he looked at 
her. She did not seem at all like a girl in love 
and parted from her affianced husband. She 
was even-tempered and calm and quite as 
cheerful as of old. This amazed Nicholas and 
even made him regard Bolk6nski's courtship 
skeptically. He could not believe that her 
fate was sealed, especially as he had not seen 
her with Prince Andrew. It always seemed- 



why did I hurry?" Nicholas began to settle to him that there was something not quite 



right about this intended marriage. 

"Why this delay? Why no betrothal?" he 
thought. Once, when he had touched on this 
topic with his mother, he discovered, to his sur- 
prise and somewhat to his satisfaction, that in 
the depth of her soul she too had doubts about 
this marriage. 

"You see he writes," said she, showing her 
son a letter of Prince Andrew's, with that la- 
tent grudge a mother always has in regard to a 
daughter's future married happiness, "he writes 
that he won't come before December. What 
can be keeping him? Illness, probably! His 
health is very delicate. Don't tell Natdsha. And 
don't attach importance to her being so bright: 
that's because she's living through the last days 
of her girlhood, but I know what she is like 
every time we receive a letter from him! How- 
ever, God grant that everything turns out 
well!" (She always ended with these words.) 
"He is an excellent man!" 

CHAPTER II 

AFTER REACHING HOME Nicholas was at first 
serious and even dull. He was worried by the 
impending necessity of interferinginthestupid 
business matters for which his mother had 
called him home. To throw off this burden as 
quickly as possible, on the third day after his 
arrival he went, angry and scowling and with- 
out answering questions as to where he was 
going, to Mitenka's lodge and demanded an 
account of everything. But what an account of 
everything might be Nicholas knew even less 
than the frightened and bewildered Mitenka. 
The conversation and the examination of the 
accounts with Mitenka did not last long. The 
village elder, a peasant delegate, and the vil- 
lage clerk, who were waiting in the passage, 
heard with fear and delight first the young 
count's voice roaring and snapping and rising 
louder and louder, and then words of abuse, 
dreadful words, ejaculated one after the other. 

"Robber! . . . Ungrateful wretch! . . .I'll hack 
the dog to pieces! I'm not my father! . . . Rob- 
bing us! . . ." and so on. 

Then with no less fear and delight they saw 
how the young count, red in the face and with 
bloodshot eyes, dragged MUenka out by the 
scruff of the neck and applied his foot and 
knee to him behind with great agility at con- 
venient moments between the words, shout- 
ing, "Be off! Never let me see your face here 
again, you villain!" 

Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps 
and ran away into the shrubbery. (This shrub- 



BOOK SEVEN 277 

bery was a well-known haven of refuge for cul- 



prits at Otrddnoe. Mftenka himself, returning 
tipsy from the town, used to hide there, and 
many of the residents at Otrddnoe, hiding from 
Mitenka, knew of its protective qualities.) 

Mf tenka's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their 
heads and frightened faces out of the door of a 
room where a bright samovar was boiling and 
where the steward's high bedstead stood with 
its patchwork quilt. 

The young count paid no heed to them, but, 
breathing hard, passed by with resolute strides 
and went into the house. 

The countess, who heard at once from the 
maids what had happened at the lodge, was 
calmed by the thought that now their affairs 
would certainly improve, but on the other 
hand felt anxious as to the effect this excite- 
ment might have on her son. She went several 
times to his door on tiptoe and listened, as he 
lighted one pipe after another. 

Next day the old count called his son aside 
and, with an embarrassed smile, said to him: 

"But you know, my dear boy, it's a pity you 
got excited! Mitenka has told me all about it." 

"I knew," thought Nicholas, "that I should 
never understand any thing in this crazy world." 

"You were angry that he had not entered 
those 700 rubles. But they were carried for- 
wardand you did not look at the other page." 

"Papa, he is a blackguard and a thief! I know 
he is! And what I have done, I have done; but, 
if you like, I won't speak to him again." 

"No, my dear boy" (the count, too, felt em- 
barrassed. He knew he had mismanaged his 
wife's property and was to blame toward his 
children, but he did not know how to remedy 
it). "No, I beg you to attend to the business. I 
am old. I ..." 

"No, Papa. Forgive me if I have caused you 
unpleasantness. I understand it all less than 
you do." 

"Devil take all these peasants, and money 
matters, and carryings forward from page to 
page," he thought. "I used to understand what 
a 'corner* and the stakes at cards meant, but 
carrying forward to another page I don't un- 
derstand at all," said he to himself, and after 
that he did not meddle in business affairs. But 
once the countess called her son and informed 
him that she had a promissory note from Anna 
Mikhdylovna for two thousand rubles, and 
asked him what he thought of doing with it. 

"This," answered Nicholas. "You say it rests 
with me. Well, I don't like Anna Mikhdylov- 
na and I don't like Boris, but they were our 



278 



WAR AND PEACE 



friends and poor. Well then, this I" and he tore 
up the note, and by so doing caused the old 
countess to weep tears of joy. After that, young 
Rost6v took no further part in any business af- 
fairs, but devoted himself with passionate en- 
thusiasm to what was to him a new pursuit 
the chase for which his father kept a large 
establishment. 

CHAPTER III 

THE WEATHER was already growing wintry and 
morning frosts congealed an earth saturated 
by autumn rains. The verdure had thickened 
and its bright green stood out sharply against 
the brownish strips of winter rye trodden down 
by the cattle, and against the pale-yellow stub- 
ble of the spring sowing and the reddish strips 
of buckwheat. The wooded ravines and the 
copses, which at the end of August had still 
been green islands amid black fields and stub- 
ble, had become golden and bright-red islands 
amid the green winter rye. The hares had al- 
ready half changed their summer coats, the fox 
cubs were beginning to scatter, and the young 
wolves were bigger than dogs. It was the best 
time of the year for the chase. The hounds of 
that ardent young sportsman Rostov had not 
merely reached hard winter condition, but 
were so jaded that at a meetingof the huntsmen 
it was decided to give them a three days' rest 
and then, on the sixteenth of September, to go 
on a distant expedition, starting from the oak 
grove where there was an undisturbed litter of 
wolf cubs. 

All that day the hounds remained at home. 
It was frosty and the air was sharp, but toward 
evening the sky became overcast and it began 
to thaw. On the fifteenth, when young Rost6v, 
in his dressing gown, looked out of the window, 
he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for 
hunting: it was as if the sky were melting and 
sinking to the earth without any wind. The 
only motion in the air was that of the dripping, 
microscopic particles of drizzling mist. The 
bare twigs in the garden were hung with trans- 
parent drops which fell on the freshly fallen 
leaves. The earth in the kitchen garden looked 
wet and black and glistened like poppy seed 
and at a short distance merged into the dull, 
moist veil of mist. Nicholas went out into the 
wet and muddy porch. There was a smell of 
decaying leaves and of dog. Milka, a black- 
spotted, broad-haunched bitch with prominent 
black eyes, got up on seeing her master, 
stretched her hind legs, lay down like a hare, 
and then suddenly jumped up and licked him 



right on his nose and mustache. Another bor- 
zoi, a dog, catching sight of his master from the 
garden path, arched his back and, rushing 
headlong toward the porch with lifted tail, be- 
gan rubbing himself against his legs. 

"O-hoy!" came at that moment, that inimi- 
table huntsman's call which unites the deepest 
bass with the shrillest tenor, and round the 
corner came Daniel the head huntsman and 
head kennelman, a gray, wrinkled old man 
with hair cut straight over his forehead, Ukrain- 
ian fashion, a long bent whip in his hand, and 
that look of independence and scorn of every- 
thing that is only seen in huntsmen. He doffed 
his Circassian cap to his master and looked at 
him scornfully. This scorn was not offensive to 
his master. Nicholas knew that this Daniel, dis- 
dainful of everybody and who considered him- 
self above them, was all the same his serf and 
huntsman. 

"Daniel!" Nicholas said timidly, conscious 
at the sight of the weather, the hounds, and the 
huntsman that he was being carried away by 
that irresistible passion for sport which makes 
a man forget all his previous resolutions, as a 
lover forgets in the presence of his mistress. 

"What orders, your excellency?" said the 
huntsman in his deep bass, deep as a proto- 
deacon's and hoarse with hallooing and two 
flashing black eyes gazed from under his brows 
at his master, who was silent. "Can you resist 
it?" those eyes seemed to be asking. 

"It's a good day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, 
eh?" asked Nicholas, scratching Mflka behind 
the ears. 

Daniel did not answer, but winked instead. 

"I sent Uvrirka at dawn to listen," his bass 
boomed out after a minute's pause. "He says 
she's moved them into the OtrAdnoe enclosure. 
They were howling there." (This meant that 
the she-wolf, about whom they both knew, had 
moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a 
small place a mile and a half from the house.) 

"We ought to go, don't you think so?" said 
Nicholas. "Come to me with Uvrka." 

"As you please." 

"Then put off feeding them." 

"Yes, sir." 

Five minutes later Daniel and Uvdrka were 
standing in Nicholas' big study. Though Daniel 
was not a big man, to see him in a room was 
like seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among 
the furniture and surroundings of human life. 
Daniel himself felt this, and as usual stood just 
inside the door, trying to speak softly and not 
move, for fear of breaking something in the 



BOOK SEVEN 



master's apartment, and he hastened to say all 
that was necessary so as to get from under that 
ceiling, out into the open under the sky once 
more. 

Having finished his inquiries and extorted 
from Daniel an opinion that the hounds were 
fit (Daniel himself wished to go hunting), Nich- 
olas ordered the horses to be saddled. But just 
as Daniel was about to go Natdsha came in with 
rapid steps, not having done up her hair or fin- 
ished dressing and with her old nurse's big 
shawl wrapped round her. Pe'tya ran in at the 
same time. 

"You are going?" asked Natdsha. "I knew you 
would! S6nya said you wouldn't go, but I knew 
that today is the sort of day when you couldn't 
help going." 

"Yes, we are going," replied Nicholas reluc- 
tantly, for today, as he intended to hunt seri- 
ously, he did not want to take Natasha and Pe't- 
ya. "We are going, but only wolf hunting: it 
would be dull for you." 

"You know it is my greatest pleasure," said 
Natdsha. "It's not fair; you are going by your- 
self, are having the horses saddled and said 
nothing to us about it." 

" 'No barrier bars a Russian's path' we'll 
go!" shouted Pdtya. 

"But you can't. Mamma said you mustn't," 
said Nicholas to Natdsha. 

"Yes, I'll go. I shall certainly go," said Na- 
tdsha decisively. "Daniel, tell them to saddle 
for us, and Michael must come with my dogs," 
she added to the huntsman. 

It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper 
to be in a room at all, but to have anything to 
do with a young lady seemed to him impossible. 
He cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it 
were none of his business, careful as he went 
not to inflict any accidental injury on the 
young lady. 

CHAPTER IV 

THE OLD COUNT, who had always kept up an 
enormous hunting establishment but had now 
handed it all completely over to his son's care, 
being in very good spirits on this fifteenth of 
September, prepared to go out with the others. 
In an hour's time the whole hunting party 
was at the porch. Nicholas, with a stern and 
serious air which showed that now was no time 
for attending to trifles, went past Natdsha and 
Ptya who were trying to tell him something. 
He had a look at all the details of the hunt, sent 
a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to 
find the quarry, mounted his chestnut Done* ts, 



and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set 
off across the threshing ground to a field lead- 
ing to the Otrddnoe wood. The old count's 
horse, a sorrel gelding called Viflydnka, was led 
by the groom in attendance on him, while the 
count himself was to drive in a small trap 
straight to a spot reserved for him. 

They were taking fifty-four hounds, with six 
hunt attendants and whippers-in. Besides the 
family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen and 
more than forty borzois, so that, with the bor- 
zois on the leash belonging to members of the 
family, there were about a hundred and thirty 
dogs and twenty horsemen. 

Each dog knew its master and its call. Each 
man in the hunt knew his business, his place, 
and what he had to do. As soon as they had 
passed the fence they all spread out evenly and 
quietly, without noise or talk, along the road 
and field leading to the Otrddnoe covert. 

The horses stepped over the field as over a 
thick carpet, now and then splashing into pud- 
dles as they crossed a road. The misty sky still 
seemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly 
toward the earth, the air was still, warm, and 
silent. Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman, 
the snort of a horse, the crack of a whip, or the 
whine of a straggling hound could be heard. 

When they had gone a little less than a mile, 
five more riders with dogs appeared out of the 
mist, approaching the Rostovs. In front rode a 
fresh-looking, handsome old man with a large 
gray mustache. 

"Good morning, Uncle!" said Nicholas, when 
the old man drew near. 

"That's it. Come on! ... I was sure of it," 
began "Uncle." (He was a distant relative of 
the Rostovs', a man of small means, and their 
neighbor.) "I knew you wouldn't be able to re- 
sist it and it's a good thing you're going. That's 
it! Come on!" (This was "Uncle's" favorite ex- 
pression.) "Take the covert at once, for my Gir- 
chik says the Ildgins are at Korniki with their 
hounds. That's it. Come on! ... They'll take 
the cubs from under your very nose." 

"That's where I'm going. Shall we join up 
our packs?" asked Nicholas. 

The hounds were joined into one pack, and 
"Uncle" and Nicholas rode on side by side. Na- 
tdsha, muffled up in shawls which did not hide 
her eager face and shining eyes, galloped up to 
them. She was followed by Ptya who always 
kept close to her, by Michael, a huntsman, and 
by a groom appointed to look after her. Ptya, 
who was laughing, whipped and pulled at his 
horse. Natdsha sat easily and confidently on 



280 



WAR AND PEACE 



her black Ardbchik and reined him in without 
effort with a firm hand. 

"Uncle" looked round disapprovingly at Pe"t- 
ya and Natdsha. He did not like to combine 
frivolity with the serious business of hunting. 

"Good morning, Uncle! We are going too!" 
shouted Ptya. 

"Good morning, good morning! But don't 
go overriding the hounds," said "Uncle" stern- 

iy- 

"Nicholas, what a fine dog Trunfla is! He 
knew me," said Natdsha, referring to her favor- 
ite hound. 

"In the first place, Trunfla is not a 'dog/ but 
a harrier," thought Nicholas, and looked stern- 
ly at his sister, trying to make her feel the dis- 
tance that ought to separate them at that mo- 
ment. Natdsha understood it. 

"You mustn't think we'll be in anyone's way, 
Uncle," she said. "We'll go to our places and 
won't budge." 

"A good thing too, little countess," said "Un- 
cle," "only mind you don't fall off your horse," 
he added, "becausethat's it, come on! you've 
nothing to hold on to." 

The oasis of the Otrddnoe covert came in 
sight a few hundred yards off, the huntsmen 
were already nearing it. Rostov, having finally 
settled with "Uncle" where they should set on 
the hounds, and having shown Natasha where 
she was to standa spot where nothing could 
possibly run out went round above the ravine. 

"Well, nephew, you're going for a big wolf," 
said "Uncle." "Mind and don't let her slip!" 

"That's as may happen," answered Rost6v. 
"Karay, here!" he shouted, answering "Uncle's" 
remark by this call to his borzoi. Karay was a 
shaggy old dog with a hanging jowl, famous 
for having tackled a big wolf unaided. They 
all took up their places. 

The old count, knowing his son's ardor in 
the hunt, hurried so as not to be late, and the 
hunstmen had not yet reached their places 
when Count Ilyd Rostov, cheerful, flushed, and 
with quivering cheeks, drove up with his black 
horses over the winter rye to the place reserved 
for him, where a wolf might come out. Having 
straightened his coat and fastened on his hunt- 
ing knives and horn, he mounted his good, 
sleek, well-fed, and comfortable horse, Viflyan- 
ka, which was turning gray, like himself. His 
horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilyd 
Rost6v, though not at heart a keen sportsman, 
knew the rulesof the hunt well, and rode to the 
bushy edge of the road where he was to stand, 
arranged his reins, settled himself in the sad- 



dle, and, feeling that he was ready, looked 
about with a smile. 

Beside him was Simon Chekmar, his person- 
al attendant, an old horseman now somewhat 
stiff in the saddle. Chekmar held in leash three 
formidable wolfhounds, who had, however, 
grown fat like their master and his horse. Two 
wise old dogs lay down unleashed. Some hun- 
dred paces farther along the edge of the wood 
stood Mitka, the count's other groom, a daring 
horseman and keen rider to hounds. Before the 
hunt, by old custom, the count had drunk a 
silver cupful of mulled brandy, taken a snack, 
and washed it down with half a bottle of his 
favorite Bordeaux. 

He was somewhat flushed with the wine and 
the drive. His eyes were rather moist and glit- 
tered more than usual, and as he sat in his sad- 
dle, wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like 
a child taken out for an outing. 

The thin, hollow-cheeked Chekmar, having 
got everything ready, kept glancing at his mas- 
ter with whom he had lived on the best of terms 
for thirty years, and understanding the mood 
he was in expected a pleasant chat. A third 
person rode up circumspectly through the wood 
(it was plain that he had had a lesson) and 
stopped behind the count. This person was a 
gray-bearded old man in a woman's cloak, with 
a tall peaked cap on his head. He was the buf- 
foon, who went by a woman's name, Nastdsya 
Ivanovna. 

"Well, Nastdsya Ivdnovna!" whispered the 
count, winking at him. "If you scare away the 
beast, Daniel'll give it you!" 

"I know a thing or two myself!" said Nas- 
tdsya Ivdnovna. 

"Hush!" whispered the count and turned to 
Simon. "Have you seen the young countess?" 
he asked. "Where is she?" 

"With young Count Peter, by the Zhdrov 
rank grass," answered Simon, smiling. "Though 
she's a lady, she's very fond of hunting." 

"And you're surprised at the way she rides, 
Simon, eh?" said the count. "She's as good as 
many a man!" 

"Of course! It's marvelous. So bold, so easy!" 

"And Nicholas? Where is he? By the Lyddov 
upland, isn't he?" 

"Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He un- 
derstands the matter so well that Daniel and I 
are often quite astounded," said Simon, well 
knowing what would please his master. 

"Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on 
his horse, eh?" 

"A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out 



BOOK SEVEN 



281 



of the rank grass by the Zavarzinsk thicket the 
other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a sight 
when they rushed from the covert . . . the horse 
worth a thousand rubles and the rider beyond 
all price! Yes, one would have to search far to 
find another as smart." 

"To search far . . ." repeated the count, evi- 
dently sorry Simon had not said more. "To 
search far," he said, turning back the skirt of 
his coat to get at his snuffbox. 

"The other day when he came out from Mass 
in full uniform, Michael Sid6rych . . ." Simon 
did not finish, for on the still air he had dis- 
tinctly caught the music of the hunt with only, 
two or three hounds giving tongue. He bent 
down his head and listened, shaking a warn- 
ing finger at his master. "They are on the scent 
of the cubs . . ." he whispered, "straight to the 
Lyadov uplands." 

The count, forgetting to smooth out the 
smile on his face, looked into the distance 
straight before him, down the narrow open 
space, holding the snuff box in his hand but not 
taking any. After the cry of the hounds came 
the deep tones of the wolf call from Daniel's 
hunting horn; the pack joined the first three 
hounds and they could be heard in full cry, 
with that peculiar lift in the note that indicates 
that they are after a wolf. The whippers-in no 
longer set on the hounds, but changed to the 
cry of ulyulyu, and above the others rose Dan- 
iel's voice, now a deep bass, now piercingly 
shrill. His voice seemed to fill the whole wood 
and carried far beyond out into the open field. 

After listening a few moments in silence, the 
count and his attendant convinced themselves 
that the hounds had separated into two packs: 
the sound of the larger pack, eagerly giving 
tongue, began to die away in the distance, the 
other pack rushed by the wood past the count, 
and it was with this that Daniel's voice was 
heard calling ulyulyu. The sounds of both 
packs mingled and broke apart again, but both 
were becoming more distant. 

Simon sighed and stooped to straighten the 
leash a young borzoi had entangled; the count 
too sighed and, noticing the snuffbox in his 
hand, opened it and took a pinch. "Backl" 
cried Simon to a borzoi that was pushing for- 
ward out of the wood. The count started and 
dropped the snuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dis- 
mounted to pick it up. The count and Simon 
were looking at him. 

Then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the 
sound of the hunt suddenly approached, as if 
the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing 



were just in front of them. 

The count turned and saw on his right Mit- 
ka staring at him with eyes starting out of his 
head, raising his cap and pointing before him 
to the other side. 

"Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly 
showing that he had long fretted to utter that 
word, and letting the borzois slip he galloped 
toward the count. 

The count and Simon galloped out of the 
wood and saw on their left a wolf which, softly 
swaying from side to side, was coming at a 
quiet lope farther to the left to the very place 
where they were standing. The angry borzois 
whined and getting free of the leash rushed 
past the horses' feet at the wolf. 

The wolf paused, turned its heavy forehead 
toward the dogs awkwardly, like a man suffer- 
ing from the quinsy, and, still slightly swaying 
from side to side, gave a couple of leaps and 
with a swish of its tail disappeared into the 
skirt of the wood. At the same instant, with a 
cry like a wail, first one hound, then another, 
and then another, sprang helter-skelter from 
the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed 
across the field toward the very spot where the 
wolf had disappeared. The hazel bushes parted 
behind the hounds and Daniel's chestnut horse 
appeared, dark with sweat. On its long back 
sat Daniel, hunched forward, capless, his di- 
sheveled gray hair hanging over his flushed, 
perspiring face. 

"Ulyulyulyu! ulyulyu! . . ." he cried. When 
he caught sight of the count his eyes flashed 
lightning. 

"Blast you! "he shouted, holding up his whip 
threateningly at the count. 

"You've let the wolf go! . . .What sportsmen I" 
and as if scorning to say more to the frightened 
and shamefaced count, he lashed the heaving 
flanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all 
the anger the count had aroused and flew off 
after the hounds. The count, like a punished 
schoolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to 
win Simon'ssympathyforhis plight. But Simon 
was no longer there. He was galloping round 
by the bushes while the field was coming up 
on both sides, all trying to head the wolf, but 
it vanished into the wood before they could do 
so. 

CHAPTER V 

NICHOLAS ROSTOV meanwhile remained at his 
post, waiting for the wolf. By the way the hunt 
approached and receded, by the cries of the 
dogs whose notes were familiar to him, by the 



282 



WAR AND PEACE 



way the voices of the huntsmen approached, 
receded, and rose, he realized what was hap- 
pening at the copse. He knew that young and 
old wolves were there, that the hounds had 
separated into two packs, that somewhere a 
wolf was being chased, and that something had 
gone wrong. He expected the wolf to come his 
way any moment. He made thousands of dif- 
ferent conjectures as to where and from what 
side the beast would come and how he would 
set upon it. Hope alternated with despair. Sev- 
eral times he addressed a prayer to God that 
the wolf should come his way. He prayed with 
that passionate and shame-faced feeling with 
which men pray at moments of great excite- 
ment arising from trivial causes. "What would 
it be to Thee to do this for me?" he said to 
God. "I know Thou art great, and that it is a 
sin to ask this of Thee, but for God's sake do 
let the old wolf come my way and let Karay 
spring at it in sight of 'Uncle' who is watch- 
ing from over there and seize it by the throat 
in a death grip!" A thousand times during that 
half-hour Rost6v cast eager and restless glances 
over the edge of the wood, with the two scrag- 
gy oaks rising above the aspen undergrowth 
and the gully with its water-worn side and 
"Uncle's" cap just visible above the bush on his 
right. 

"No, I shan't have such luck," thought Ros- 
t6v, "yet what wouldn't it be worth! It is not to 
be! Everywhere, at cards and in war, I am al- 
ways unlucky." Memories of Austerlitz and of 
D61okhov flashed rapidly and clearly through 
his mind. "Only once in my life to get an old 
wolf, I want only that!" thought he, straining 
eyes and ears and looking to the left and then 
to the right and listening to the slightest vari- 
ation of note in the cries of the dogs. 

Again he looked to the right and saw some- 
thing running toward him across the deserted 
field. "No, it can't be!" thought Rost6v, tak- 
ing a deep breath, as a man does at the coming 
of something long hoped for. The height of 
happiness was reached and so simply, with- 
out warning, or noise, or display, that Rost6v 
could not believe his eyes and remained in 
doubt for over a second. The wolf ran for- 
ward and jumped heavily over a gully that 
lay in her path. She was an old animal with a 
gray back and big reddish belly. She ran with- 
out hurry, evidently feeling sure that no one 
saw her. Rost6v, holding his breath, looked 
round at the borzois. They stood or lay not see- 
ing the wolf or understanding the situation. 
Old Karay had turned his head and was angri- 



ly searching for fleas, baring his yellow teeth 
and snapping at his hind legs. 

"Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rost6v, pouting 
his lips. The borzois jumped up, jerking the 
rings of the leashes and pricking their ears. 
Karay finished scratching his hindquarters 
and, cocking his ears, got up with quivering 
tail from which tufts of matted hair hung 
down. 

"Shall I loose them or not?" Nicholas asked 
himself as the wolf approached him coming 
from the copse. Suddenly the wolf's whole phys- 
iognomy changed: she shuddered, seeing what 
she had probably never seen before human 
eyes fixed upon her and turning her head a 
little toward Rost6v, she paused. 

"Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward 
. . ." the wolf seemed to say to herself, and she 
moved forward without again looking round 
and with a quiet, long, easy yet resolute lope. 

"Ulyulyu!" cried Nicholas, in a voice not his 
own, and of its own accord his good horse dart- 
ed headlong downhill, leaping over gullies to 
head off the wolf, and the borzois passed it, 
running faster still. Nicholas did not hear his 
own cry nor feel that he was galloping, nor see 
the borzois, nor the groundover which he went: 
he saw only the wolf, who, increasing her speed, 
bounded on in the same direction along the 
hollow. The first to come into view was Milka, 
with her black markings and powerful quarters, 
gaining upon the wolf. Nearer and nearer . . . 
now she was ahead of it; but the wolf turned 
its head to face her, and instead of putting on 
speed as she usually did Mflka suddenly raised 
her tail and stiffened her forelegs. 

"Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas. 

The reddish Lyubfm rushed forward from 
behind Milka, sprang impetuously at the wolf, 
and seized it by its hindquarters, but immedi- 
ately jumped aside in terror. The wolf crouched, 
gnashed her teeth, and again rose and bound- 
ed forward, followed at the distance of a couple 
of feet by all the borzois, who did not get any 
closer to her. 

"She'll get away! No, it's impossible! "thought 
Nicholas, still shouting with a hoarse voice. 

"Karay, ulyulyu! . . ." he shouted, looking 
round for the old borzoi who was now his only 
hope. Karay, with all the strength age had left 
him, stretched himself to the utmost and, watch- 
ing the wolf, galloped heavily aside to intercept 
it. But the quickness of the wolf's lope and the 
borzoi's slower pace made it plain that Karay 
had miscalculated. Nicholas could already see 
not far in front of him the wood where the wolf 



BOOK SEVEN 



283 



would certainly escape should she reach it. But, 
coining toward him, he saw hounds and a hunts- 
man galloping almost straight at the wolf. 
There was still hope. A long, yellowish young 
borzoi, one Nicholas did not know, from an- 
other leash, rushed impetuously at the wolf 
from in front and almost knocked her over. But 
the wolf jumped up more quickly than anyone 
could have expected and, gnashing her teeth, 
flew at the yellowish borzoi, which, with a 
piercing yelp, fell with its head on the ground, 
bleeding from a gash in its side. 

"Karay? Old fellow! . . ." wailed Nicholas. 

Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing 
of the wolf's path, the old dog with its felted 
hair hanging from its thigh was within five 
paces of it. As if aware of her danger, the wolf 
turned her eyes on Karay, tucked her tail yet 
further between her legs, and increased her 
speed. But here Nicholas only saw that some- 
thing happened to Karay the borzoi was sud- 
denly on the wolf, and they rolled together 
down into a gully just in front of them. 

That instant, when Nicholas saw the wolf 
strugglingin thegullywith the dogs, while from 
under them could be seen her gray hair and out- 
stretched hind leg and her frightened choking 
head, with her ears laid back (Karay was pin- 
ning her by the throat), was the happiest mo- 
ment of his life. With his hand on his saddle- 
bow, he was ready to dismount and stab the 
wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up 
from among that mass of dogs, and then her 
forepaws were on the edge of the gully. She 
clicked her teeth (Karay no longer had her by 
the throat), leaped with a movement of her 
hind legs out of the gully, and having disen- 
gaged herself from the dogs, with tail tucked 
in again, went forward. Kardy, his hair bris- 
tling, and probably bruised or wounded, 
climbed with difficulty out of the gully. . 

"Oh my God! Why?" Nicholas cried in des- 
pair. 

i "Uncle's" huntsman was galloping from the 
other side across the wolf's path and his borzois 
once more stopped the animal's advance. She 
was again hemmed in. 

Nicholas and his attendant, with "Uncle" 
and his huntsman, were all riding round the 
wolf, crying "ulyulyu!" shouting and prepar- 
ing to dismount each moment that the wolf 
crouched back, and starting forward again ev- 
ery time she shook herself and moved toward 
the wood where she would be safe. 

Already, at the beginning of this chase, 
Daniel, hearing theulyulyuing, had rushed out 



from the wood. He saw Karay seize the wolf, 
and checked his horse, supposing the affair to 
be over. But when he saw that the horsemen 
did not dismount and that the wolf shook her- 
self and ran for safety, Daniel set his chestnut 
galloping, not at the wolf but straight toward 
the wood, just as Karay had run to cut the ani- 
mal off. As a result of this, he galloped up to 
the wolf just when she had been stopped a sec- 
ond time by "Uncle's" borzois. 

Daniel galloped up silently, holding a naked 
dagger in his left hand and thrashing the la- 
boring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip 
as if it were a flail. 

Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel un- 
til the chestnut, breathing heavily, panted past 
him, and he heard the fall of a body and saw 
Daniel lying on the wolf's back among the dogs, 
trying to seize her by the ears. It was evident 
to the dogs, the hunters, and to the wolf her- 
self that all was now over. The terrified wolf 
pressed back her ears and tried to rise, but the 
borzois stuck to her. Daniel rose a little, took 
a step, and with his whole weight, as if lying 
down to rest, fell on the wolf, seizing her by 
the ears. Nicholas was about to stab her, but 
Daniel whispered, "Don't! We'll gag her!" and, 
changing his position, set his foot on the wolf's 
neck. A stick was thrust between her jaws and 
she was fastened with a leash, as if bridled, her 
legs were bound together, and Daniel rolled 
her over once or twice from side to side. 

With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the 
old wolf, alive, on a shying and snorting horse 
and, accompanied by the dogs yelping at her, 
took her to the place where they were all to 
meet. The hounds had killed two of the cubs 
and the borzois three. The huntsmen assem- 
bled with their booty and their stories, and all 
came to look at the wolf, which, with her 
broad-browed head hanging down and the bit- 
ten stick between her jaws, gazed with great 
glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men sur- 
rounding her. When she was touched, she jerked 
her bound legs and looked wildly yet simply at 
everybody. Old Count Rost6valso rode up and 
touched the wolf. 

"Oh, what a formidable one!" said he. "A 
formidable one, eh?" he asked Daniel, who was 
standing near. 

"Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, 
quickly doffing his cap. 

The count remembered the wolf he had let 
slip and his encounter with Daniel. 

"Ah, but you are a crusty fellow, friend!" 
said the count. 



284 



WAR AND PEACE 



For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy, child- 
like, meek, and amiable smile. 

CHAPTER VI 

THE OLD COUNT went home, and Natdsha and 
P^tya promised to return very soon, but as it 
was still early the hunt went farther. At mid- 
day they put the hounds into a ravine thickly 
overgrown with young trees. Nicholas standing 
in a fallow field could see all his whips. 

Facing him lay a field of winter rye, and there 
his own huntsman stood alone in a hollow be- 
hind a hazel bush. The hounds had scarcely 
been loosed before Nicholas heard one he 
knew, Volt6rn, giving tongue at intervals; oth- 
er hounds joined in, now pausing and now a- 
gain giving tongue. A moment later he heard a 
cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been 
found, and the whole pack, joining together, 
rushed along the ravine toward theryefield and 
away from Nicholas. 

He saw the whips in their red caps galloping 
along the edge of the ravine, he even saw the 
hounds, and was expecting a fox to show itself 
at any moment on the ryefield opposite. 

The huntsman standing in the hollow moved 
and loosed his borzois, and Nicholas saw a 
queer, short-legged red fox with a fine brush 
going hard across the field. The borzois bore 
down on it. ... Now they drew close to the fox 
which began to dodge between the field in 
sharper and sharper curves, trailing its brush, 
when suddenly a strange white borzoi dashed 
in followed by a black one, and everything was 
in confusion; the borzois formed a star-shaped 
figure, scarcely swaying their bodies and with 
tails turned away from the center of the group. 
Two huntsmen galloped up to the dogs; one in 
a red cap, the other, a stranger, in a green coat. 

"What's this?" thought Nicholas. "Where's 
that huntsman from? He is not 'Uncle's' man." 

The huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there 
a long time without strapping it to the saddle. 
Their horses, bridled and with high saddles, 
stood near them and there too the dogs were 
lying. The huntsmen waved their arms and 
did something to the fox. Then from that spot 
came the sound of a horn, with the signal agreed 
on in case of a fight. 

"That's Ilagin's huntsman havinga row with 
our Ivdn," said Nicholas* groom. 

Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and 
Ptya to him, and rode at a footpace to the 
place where the whips were getting the hounds 
together. Several of the field galloped to the 
spot where the fight was going on. 



Nicholas dismounted, and with Natasha and 
Pe"tya, who had ridden up, stopped near the 
hounds, waiting to see how the matter would 
end. Out of the bushes came the huntsman who 
had been fighting and rode toward his young 
master, with the fox tied to his crupper. While 
still at a distance he took off his cap and tried 
to speak respectfully, but he was pale and 
breathless and his face was angry. One of his 
eyes was black, but he probably was not even 
aware of it. 

"What has happened?" asked Nicholas. 

"A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had 
huntedl And it was my gray bitch that caught 
it! Go to law, indeed! ... He snatches at the 
fox! I gave him one with the fox. Here it is on 
my saddle! Do you want a taste of this? . . ." 
said the huntsman, pointing to his dagger and 
probably imagining himself still speaking to 
his foe. 

Nicholas, not stopping to talk to the man, 
asked his sister and Petya to wait for him and 
rode to the spot where the enemy's, Ildgin's, 
hunting party was. 

The victorious huntsman rode off to join the 
field, and there, surrounded by inquiring sym- 
pathizers, recounted his exploits. 

The facts were that Ildgin, with whom the 
Rostovs had a quarrel and were at law, hunted 
over places that belonged bv custom to the Ros- 
tovs, and had now, as if purposely, sent his men 
to the very woods the Rost6vs were hunting 
and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had 
chased. 

Nicholas, though he had never seen Ildgin, 
with his usual absence of moderation in judg- 
ment, hated him cordially from reports of his 
arbitrariness and violence, and regarded him 
as his bitterest foe. He rode in angry agitation 
toward him, firmly grasping his whip and ful- 
ly prepared to take the most resolute and des- 
perate steps to punish his enemy. 

Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood 
before a stout gentleman in a beaver cap came 
riding toward him on a handsome raven-black 
horse, accompanied by two hunt servants. 

Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ild- 
gin a stately and courteous gentleman who was 
particularly anxious to make the young count's 
acquaintance. Having ridden up to Nicholas, 
Ildgin raised his beaver cap and said he much 
regretted what had occurred and would have 
the man punished who had allowed himself to 
seize a fox hunted by someone else's borzois. 
He hoped to become better acquainted with 
the count and invited him to draw his covert. 



BOOK SEVEN 



285 



Natdsha, afraid that her brother would do 
something dreadful, had followed him in some 
excitement. Seeing the enemies exchanging 
friendly greetings, she rode up to them. Ilagin 
lifted his beaver cap still higher to Natasha 
and said, with a pleasant smile, that the young 
countess resembled Diana in her passion for 
the chase as well as in her beauty, of which he 
had heard much. 

To expiate his huntsman's offense, Ilagin 
pressed the Rost6vs to come to an upland of 
his about a mile away which he usually kept for 
himself and which, he said, swarmed with hares. 
Nicholas agreed, and the hunt, now doubled, 
moved on. 

The way to Ilagin's upland was across the 
fields. The hunt servants fell into line. The 
masters rode together. "Uncle," Rost6v, and 
Ilagin kept stealthily glancing at one another's 
dogs, trying not to be observed by their com- 
panions and searching uneasily for rivals to 
their own borzois. 

Rost6v was particularly struck by the beauty 
of a small, pure-bred, red-spotted bitch on Il- 
agin's leash, slender but with muscles like steel, 
a delicate muzzle, and prominent black eyes. 
He had heard of the swiftness of Ilagin's bor- 
zois, and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival to 
his own Milka. 

In the middle of a sober conversation begun 
by Ilagin about the year's harvest, Nicholas 
pointed to the red-spotted bitch. 

"A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a care- 
less tone. "Is she swift?" 

"That one? Yes, she's a good dog, gets what 
she's after," answered Ilagin indifferently, of 
the red-spotted bitch Erza, for which, a year 
before, he had given a neighbor three families 
of house serfs. "So in your parts, too, the har- 
vest is nothing to boast of, Count?" he went 
on, continuing the conversation they had be- 
gun. And considering it polite to return the 
young count's compliment, Ilagin looked at 
his borzois and picked out Mflka who attract- 
ed his attention by her breadth. "That black- 
spotted one of yours is finewell shaped!" 
said he. 

"Yes, she's fast enough," replied Nicholas, 
and thought: "If only a full-grown hare would 
cross the field now I'd show you what sort of 
borzoi she is, M and turning to his groom, he 
said he would give a ruble to anyone who found 
a hare. 

"I don't understand," continued Ilagin, 
"how some sportsmen can be so jealous about 
game and dogs. For myself, I can tell you, 



Count, I enjoy riding in company such as this 
. . . what could be better?" (he again raised his 
cap to Natasha) "but as for counting skins 
and what one takes, I don't care about that." 

"Of course not!" 

"Or being upset because someone else's bor- 
zoi and not mine catches something. All I care 
about is to enjoy seeing the chase, is it not so, 
Count? For I consider that . . ." 

"A-tu!" came the long-drawn cry of one of 
the borzoi whippers-in, who had halted. He 
stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his 
whip aloft, and again repeated his long-drawn 
cry, "A-tu!" (This call and the uplifted whip 
meant that he saw a sitting hare.) 

"Ah, he has found one, I think," said Ilagin 
carelessly. "Well, let us course it, Count." 

"Yes, we must ride up. . . . Shall we both 
course it?" answered Nicholas, seeing in Erzd 
and "Uncle's" red Rugay two rivals he had nev- 
er yet had a chance of pitting against his own 
borzois. "And suppose they outdo my Milka at 
once!" he thought as he rode with "Uncle" and 
Ildgin toward the hare. 

"A full-grown one?" asked Ilagin as he ap- 
proached the whip who had sighted the hare 
and not without agitation he looked round and 
whistled to Erza. 

"And you, Michael Nikan6rovich?" he said, 
addressing "Uncle." 

The latter was riding with a sullen expres- 
sion on his face. 

"How can I join in? Why, you've given a vil- 
lage for each of your borzois! That's it, come 
on! Yours are worth thousands. Try yours a- 
gainst one another, you two, and I'll look on!" 

"Rugay, hey, hey!" he shouted. "Rugiyush- 
kal" he added, involuntarily by this diminutive 
expressing his affection and the hopes he placed 
on this red borzoi. Natasha saw and felt the agi- 
tation the two elderly men and her brother 
were trying to conceal, and was herself excited 
by it. 

The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll 
holding up his whip and the gentlefolk rode 
up to him at a footpace; the hounds that were 
far off on the horizon turned away from the 
hare, and the whips, but not the gentlefolk, al- 
so moved away. All were moving slowly and 
sedately. 

"How is it pointing?" asked Nicholas, rid- 
ing a hundred paces toward the whip who had 
sighted the hare. 

But before the whip could reply, the hare, 
scenting the frost coming next morning, was 
unable to rest and leaped up. The pack on 



286 



WAR AND PEACE 



leash rushed downhill in full cry after the hare, 
and from all sides the borzois that were not 
on leash darted after the hounds and the hare. 
All the hunt, who had been moving slowly, 
shouted, "Stop!" calling in the hounds, while 
the borzoi whips, with a cry of "A-tu!" galloped 
across the field, setting the borzois on the hare. 
The tranquil Ildgin, Nicholas, Natdsha, and 
"Uncle" flew, reckless of where and how they 
went, seeing only the borzois and the hare and 
fearing only to lose sight even for an instant of 
the chase. The hare they had started was a 
strong and swift one. When he jumped up he 
did not run at once, but pricked his ears listen- 
ing to the shouting and trampling that resound- 
ed from all sides at once. He took a dozen 
bounds, not very quickly, letting the borzois 
gain on him, and, finally having chosen his di- 
rection and realized his danger, laid back his 
ears and rushed off headlong. He had been ly- 
ing in the stubble, but in front of him was the 
autumn sowing where the ground was soft. 
The two borzois of the huntsman who had 
sighted him, having been the nearest, were the 
first to see and pursue him, but they had not 
gone far before login's red-spotted Erzd passed 
them, got within a length, flew at the hare with 
terrible swiftness aiming at his scut, and, think- 
ing she had seized him, rolled over like a ball. 
The hare arched his back and bounded off yet 
more swiftly. From behind Erzd rushed the 
broad-haunched, black-spotted Milka and be- 
gan rapidly gaining on the hare. 

"Mildshka, dear!" rose Nicholas* trium- 
phant cry. It looked as if Milka would immedi- 
ately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him 
and flew past. The hare had squatted. Again 
the beautiful Erzd reached him, but when close 
to the hare's scut paused as if measuring the 
distance, so as not to make a mistake this time 
but seize his hind leg. 

"Erzd, darling!" Ildgin wailed in a voice un- 
like his own. Erza did not hearken to his ap- 
peal. At the very moment when she would have 
seized her prey, the hare moved and darted 
along the balk between the winter rye and the 
stubble. Again Erza and Mflka were abreast, 
running like a pair of carriage horses, and be- 
gan to overtake the hare, but it was easier for 
the hare to run on the balk and the borzois did 
not overtake him so quickly. 

"Rugay, Rugdyushka! That's it, come on!" 
came a third voice just then, and "Uncle's" red 
borzoi, straining and curving its back, caught 
up with the two foremost borzois, pushed 
ahead of them regardless of the terrible strain, 



put on speed close to the hare, knocked it off 
the balk onto the ryefield, again put on speed 
still more viciously, sinking to his knees in the 
muddy field, and all one could see was how, 
muddying his back, he rolled over with the 
hare. A ring of borzois surrounded him. A mo- 
ment later everyone had drawn up round the 
crowd of dogs. Only the delighted "Uncle" dis- 
mounted, and cut off a pad, shaking the hare 
for the blood to drip off, and anxiously glanc- 
ing round with restless eyes while his arms 
and legs twitched. He spoke without himself 
knowing whom to or what about. "That's it, 
come on! That's a dog! . . . There, it has beat- 
en them all, the thousand-ruble as well as the 
one-ruble borzois. That's it, come on!" said he, 
panting and looking wrathfully around as if 
he were abusing someone, as if they were all 
his enemies and had insulted him, and only 
now had he at last succeeded in justifying him- 
self. "There are your thousand-ruble ones. . . . 
That's it, come on! . . ." 

"Rugay, here's a pad for you I "he said, throw- 
ing down the hare's muddy pad. "You've de- 
served it, that's it, come on!" 

"She'd tired herself out, she'd run it down 
three times by herself," said Nicholas, also not 
listening to anyone and regardless of whether 
he were heard or not. 

"But what is there in running across it like 
that?" said Ilagin's groom. 

"Once she had missed it and turned it away, 
any mongrel could take it," ILigin was saying 
at the same time, breathless from his gallop and 
his excitement. At the same moment Nauisha, 
without drawing breath, screamed joyously, ec- 
statically, and so piercingly that it set every- 
one's ear tingling. By that shriek she expressed 
what the others expressed by all talkingat once, 
and it was so strange that she must herself have 
been ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else 
would have been amazed at it at any other time. 
"Uncle" himself twisted up the hare, threw it 
neatly and smartly across his horse's back as if 
by that gesture he meant to rebuke everybody, 
and, with an air of not wishing to speak to any- 
one, mounted his bay and rode off. The others 
all followed, dispirited and shamefaced, and 
only much later were they able to regain their 
former affectation of indifference. For a long 
time they continued to look at red Rugay who, 
his arched back spattered with mud and clank- 
ing the ring of his leash, walked along just be- 
hind "Uncle's" horse with the serene air of a 
conqueror. 

"Well, I am like any other dog as long as it's 



BOOK SEVEN 



287 



not a question of coursing. But when it is, then 
look out!" his appearance seem to Nicholas to 
be saying. 

When, much later, "Uncle" rode up to Nich- 
olas and began talking to him, he felt flattered 
that, after what had happened, "Uncle" 
deigned to speak to him. 

CHAPTER VII 

TOWARD EVENING Ilagin took leave of Nicholas, 
who found that they were so far from home 
that he accepted "Uncle's" offer that the hunt- 
ing party should spend the night in his little 
village of Mikhaylovna. 

"And if you put up at my house that will be 
better stilL That's it, come onl" said "Uncle." 
"You see it's damp weather, and you could 
rest, and the little countess could be driven 
home in a trap." 

"Uncle's" offer was accepted. A huntsman 
was sent to Otradnoe for a trap, while Nicho- 
las rode with Natdsha and Ptya to "Uncle's" 
house. 

Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, 
rushed out to the front porch to meet their 
master. A score of women serfs, old and young, 
as well as children, popped out from the back 
entrance to have a look at the hunters who 
were arriving. The presenceof Natasha a worn- 
an, a lady, and on horseback raised the curi- 
osity of the serfs to such a degree that many of 
them came up to her, stared her in the face, 
and unabashed by her presence made remarks 
about her as though she were some prodigy on 
show and not a human being able to hear or 
understand what was said about her. 

"Arfnka! Look, she sits sideways! There she 
sits and her skirt dangles. . . . See, she's got a 
little hunting horn!" 

"Goodness gracious! See her knife? . . ." 

"Isn't she a Tartar!" 

"How is it you didn't go head over heels?" 
asked the boldest of all, addressing Natdsha 
directly. 

"Uncle" dismounted at the porch of his lit- 
tle wooden house which stood in the midst of 
an overgrown garden and, after a glance at 
his retainers, shouted authoritatively that the 
superfluous ones should take themselves off and 
that all necessary preparations should be made 
to receive the guests and the visitors. 

The serfs all dispersed. "Uncle" lifted Na- 
tdsha off her horse and taking her hand led her 
up the rickety wooden steps of the porch. The 
house, with its bare, unplastered log walls, was 
not overclean it did not seem that those liv- 



ing in it aimed at keeping it spotless but nei- 
ther was it noticeably neglected. In the entry 
there was a smell of fresh apples, and wolf and 
fox skins hung about. 

"Uncle" led the visitors through the ante- 
room into a small hall with a folding table and 
red chairs, then into the drawing room with a 
round birchwood table and a sofa, and finally 
into his private room where there was a tattered 
sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits of Suv6rov, 
of the host's father and mother, and of himself 
in military uniform. The study smelt strongly 
of tobacco and dogs. "Uncle" asked his visitors 
to sit down and make themselves at home, and 
then went out of the room. Rugay, his back still 
muddy, came into the room and lay down on 
the sofa, cleaning himself with his tongue and 
teeth. Leading from the study was a passage in 
which a partition with ragged curtains could 
be seen. From behind this came women's laugh- 
ter and whispers. Natasha, Nicholas, and PeHya 
took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa. 
PC* tya, leaning on his elbow, fell asleep at once. 
Natasha and Nicholas were silent. Their faces 
glowed, they were hungry and very cheerful. 
They looked at one another (now that the 
hunt was over and they were in the house, 
Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to 
show his manly superiority over his sister), Na- 
tdsha gave him a wink, and neither refrained 
long from bursting into a peal of ringinglaugh- 
ter even before they had a pretext ready to ac- 
count for it. 

After a while "Uncle" came in, in a Cossack 
coat, blue trousers, and small top boots. And 
Natasha felt that this costume, the very one 
she had regarded with surprise and amusement 
at Otrddnoe, was just the right thing and not 
at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat. 
"Uncle" too was in high spirits and far from 
being offended by the brother's and sister's 
laughter (it could never enter his head that 
they might be laughing at his way of life) he 
himself joined in the merriment. 

"That's right, young countess, that's it, come 
on! I never saw anyone like her!" said he, offer- 
ing Nicholas a pipe with a long stem and, with 
a practiced motion of three fingers, taking 
down another that had been cut short. "She's 
ridden all day like a man, and is as fresh as 
ever!" 

Soon after "Uncle's" reappearance the door 
was opened, evidently from the sound by a 
barefooted girl, and a stout, rosy, good-looking 
woman of about forty, with a double chin and 
full red lips, entered carrying a large loaded 



288 



WAR AND PEACE 



tray. With hospitable dignity and cordiality in 
her glance and in every motion, she looked at 
the visitors and, with a pleasant smile, bowed 
respectfully. In spite of her exceptional stout- 
ness, which caused her to protrude her chest 
and stomach and throw back her head, this 
woman (who was "Uncle's" housekeeper) trod 
very lightly. She went to the table, set down 
the tray, and with her plump white hands deft- 
ly took from it the bottles and various hors 
d'oeuvres and dishes and arranged them on 
the table. When she had finished, she stepped 
aside and stopped at the door with a smile on 
her face. "Here I am. I am she! Now do you 
understand 'Uncle'?" her expression said to 
Rost6v. How could one help understanding? 
Not only Nicholas, but even Natasha under- 
stood the meaning of his puckered brow and 
the happy complacent smile that slightly puck- 
ered his lips when Anfsya Fedorovna entered. 
On the tray was a bottle of herb wine, different 
kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms, rye cakes 
made with buttermilk, honey in the comb, still 
mead and sparkling mead, apples, nuts (raw 
and roasted), and nut-and- honey sweets. After- 
wards she brought a freshly roasted chicken, 
ham, preserves made with honey, and preserves 
made with sugar. 

All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's 
housekeeping, gathered and prepared by her. 
The smell and taste of it all had a smack of 
Anfsya Fedorovna herself: a savor of juiciness, 
cleanliness, whiteness, and pleasant smiles. 

"Take this, little Lady-Countess!" she kept 
saying, as she offered Natdsha first one thing 
and then another. 

Natdsha ate of everything and thought she 
had never seen or eaten such buttermilk cakes, 
such aromatic jam, such honey-and-nut sweets, 
or such a chicken anywhere. Anfsya Fedorovna 
left the room. 

After supper, over their cherry brandy, Ros- 
t6v and "Uncle" talked of past and future 
hunts, of Rugdy and Ildgin's dogs, while Na- 
tdsha sat upright on the sofa and listened with 
sparkling eyes. She tried several times to wake 
Ptya that he might eat something, but he only 
muttered incoherent words without waking 
up. Natdsha felt so lighthearted and happy in 
these novel surroundings that she only feared 
the trap would come for her too soon. After a 
casual pause, such as often occurs when re- 
ceiving friends for the first time in one's own 
house, "Uncle," answering a thought that was 
in his visitors' minds, said: 

"This, you see, is how I am finishing my days. 



. . . Death will come. That's it, come onl Noth- 
ing will remain. Then why harm anyone?" 

"Uncle's" face was very significant and even 
handsome as he said this. Involuntarily Ros- 
tov recalled all the good he had heard about 
him from his father and the neighbors. 
Throughout the whole province "Uncle" had 
the reputation of being the most honorable 
and disinterested of cranks. They called him 
in to decide family disputes, chose him as ex- 
ecutor, confided secrets to him, elected him to 
be a justice and to other posts; but he always 
persistently refused public appointments, pass- 
ing the autumn and spring in the fields on his 
bay gelding, sitting at home in winter, and ly- 
ing in his overgrown garden in summer. 

"Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?" 

"I did once, but gave it up. I am not fit for 
it. That's it, come on! I can't make head or tail 
of it. That's for youI haven't brains enough. 
Now, hunting is another matter that's it, come 
on! Open the door, there!" he shouted. "Why 
have you shut it?" 

The door at the end of the passage led to the 
huntsmen's room, as they called the room for 
the hunt servants. 

There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and 
an unseen hand opened the door into the hunts- 
men's room, from which came the clear sounds 
of a balaldyka on which someone, who was evi- 
dently a master of the art, was playing. Natd- 
sha had been listening to those strains forsome 
time and now went out into the passage to 
hear better. 

"That's Mftka, my coachman. ... I have got 
him a good balaldyka. I'm fond of it," said 
"Uncle." 

It was the custom for Mftka to play the bala- 
ldyka in the huntsmen's room when "Uncle" 
returned from the chase. "Uncle" was fond of 
such music. 

"How good! Really very good!" said Nich- 
olas with some unintentional superciliousness, 
as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased 
him very much. 

"Very good?" said Natdsha reproachfully, 
noticing her brother's tone. "Not Very good' 
it's simply delicious!" 

Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, honey, 
and cherry brandy had seemed to her the best 
in the world, so also that song, at that moment, 
seemed to her the acme of musical delight. 

"More, please, morel" cried Natdsha at the 
door as soon as the balaldyka ceased. Mftka 
tuned up afresh, and recommenced thrum- 
ming the balaldyka to the air of My Lady, with 



BOOK SEVEN 



289 



trills and variations. "Uncle" sat listening, 
slightly smiling, with his head on one side. The 
air was repeated a hundred times. The balalay- 
ka was retuned several times and the same notes 
were thrummed again, but the listeners did 
not grow weary of it and wished to hear it again 
and again. Anisya Fedorovna came in and 
leaned her portly person against the doorpost. 

"You like listening?" she said to Natasha, 
with a smile extremely like "Uncle's." "That's 
a good player of ours," she added. 

"He doesn't play that part rightl" said "Un- 
cle" suddenly, with an energetic gesture. "Here 
he ought to burst out that's it, come on ! ought 
to burst out." 

"Do you play then?" asked Natasha. 

"Uncle" did not answer, but smiled. 

"Anisya, go and see if the strings of my gui- 
tar are all right. I haven't touched it for a long 
time. That's it come on! I've given it up." 

Anfsya Fedorovna, with her light step, will- 
ingly went to fulfill her errand and brought 
back the guitar. 

Without looking at anyone, "Uncle" blew 
the dust off it and, tapping the case with his 
bony fingers, tuned the guitar and settled him- 
self in his armchair. He took (he guitar a little 
above the fingerboard, arching his left elbow 
with a somewhat theatrical gesture, and, with 
a wink at Anisya Fedorovna, struck a single 
chord, pure and sonorous, and then quietly, 
smoothly, and confidently began playing in 
very slow time, not My Lady, but the well- 
known song: Came a maiden down the street. 
The tune, played with precision^and in exact 
time, began to thrill in the hearts of Nicholas 
and Natdsha, arousing in them the same kind 
of sober mirth as radiated from Anisya Fedo- 
rovna's whole being. Anisya Fedorovna flushed, 
and drawing her kerchief over her face went 
laughing out of the room. "Uncle" continued 
to play correctly, carefully, with energetic firm- 
ness, looking with a changed and inspired ex- 
pression at the spot where Anfsya Fedorovna 
had just stood. Something seemed to be laugh- 
ing a little on one side of his face under his 
gray mustaches, especially as the song grew 
brisker and the time quicker and when, here 
and there, as he rah his fingers over the strings, 
something seemed to snap. 

"Lovely, lovely I Go on, Uncle, go on!" 
shouted Natasha as soon as he had finished. 
She jumped up and hugged and kissed him. 
"Nicholas, NicholasI" she said, turning to her 
brother, as if asking him: "What is it moves me 
so?" 



Nicholas too was greatly pleased by "Un- 
cle's" playing, and "Uncle" played the piece 
over again. Anfsya Fedorovna's smiling face re- 
appeared in the doorway and behind hers oth- 
er faces. . . . 

Fetching water clear and sweet, 
Stop, dear maiden, I entreat 

played "Uncle" once more, running his fingers 
skillfully over the strings, and then he stopped 
short and jerked his shoulders. 

"Go on, Uncle dear," Nauisha wailed in an 
imploring tone as if her life depended on it. 

"Uncle" rose, and it was as if there were two 
men in him: one of them smiled seriously at 
the merry fellow, while the merry fellow struck 
a naive and precise attitude preparatory to a 
folk dance. 

"Now then, niece!" he exclaimed, waving to 
Natasha the hand that had just struck a chord. 

Natasha threw off the shawl from her shoul- 
ders, ran forward to face "Uncle," and setting 
her arms akimbo also made a motion with her 
shoulders and struck an attitude. 

Where, how, and when had this young count- 
ess, educated by an emigree French governess, 
imbibed from the Russian air she breathed 
that spirit and obtained that manner which 
the pas de chdle * would, one would have sup- 
posed, long ago have effaced? But the spirit 
and the movements were those inimitable and 
un teachable Russian ones that "Uncle" had 
expected of her. As soon as she had struck her 
pose, and smiled triumphantly, proudly, and 
with sly merriment, the fear that had at first 
seized Nicholas and the others that she might 
not do the right thing was at an end, and they 
were already admiring her. 

She did the right thing with such precision, 
such complete precision, that Anisya Fedorov- 
na, who had at once handed her the handker- 
chief she needed for the dance, had tears in 
her eyes, though she laughed as she watched 
this slim, graceful countess, reared in silks and 
velvets and so different from herself, who yet 
was able to understand all that was in Anfsya 
and in Anfsya's father and mother and aunt, 
and in every Russian man and woman. 

"Well, little countess; that's it come on!" 
cried "Uncle," with a joyous laugh, having 
finished the dance. "Well done, niece! Now a 
fine young fellow must be found as husband 
for you. That's it come on!" 

"He's chosen already," said Nicholas smil- 
ing. 

1 The French shawl dance. 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Oh?" said "Uncle" in surprise, looking in- 
quiringly at Natdsha, who nodded her head 
with a happy smile. 

"And such a one!" she said. But as soon as 
she had said it a new train of thoughts and 
feelings arose in her. "What did Nicholas' smile 
mean when he said 'chosen already'? Is he glad 
of it or not? It is as if he thought my Bolk6nski 
would not approve of or understand our gaiety. 
But he would understand it all. Where is he 
now?" she thought, and her face suddenly be- 
came serious. But this lasted only a second. 
"Don't dare to think about it," she said to her- 
self, and sat down again smilingly beside "Un- 
cle," begging him to play something more. 

"Uncle" played another song and a valse; 
then after a pause he cleared his throat and 
sang his favorite hunting song: 

As 'twas growing dark last night 
Fell the snow so soft and light . /. 

"Uncle" sang as peasants sing, with full and 
nai've conviction that the whole meaning of a 
song lies in the words and that the tune comes 
of itself, and that apart from the words there 
is no tune, which exists only to give measure 
to the words. As a result of this the unconsid- 
ered tune, like the song of a bird, was extra- 
ordinarily good. Natasha was in ecstasies over 
"Uncle's" singing. She resolved to give up 
learning the harp and to play only the guitar. 
She asked "Uncle" for his guitar and at once 
found the chords of the song. 

After nine o'clock two traps and three 
mounted men, who had been sent to look for 
them, arrived to fetch Natdsha and Pdtya. The 
count and countess did not know where they 
were and were very anxious, said one of the 
men. 

Ptya was carried out like a log and laid in 
the larger of the two traps. Natasha and Nich- 
olas got into the other. "Uncle" wrapped Na- 
tdsha up warmly and took leave of her with 
quite a new tenderness. He accompanied them 
on foot as far as the bridge that could not be 
crossed, so that they had to go round by the 
ford, and he sent huntsmen to ride in front 
with lanterns. 

"Good-by, dear niece," his voice called out 
of the darkness not the voice Natdsha had 
known previously, but the one that had sung 
As 'twas growing dark last night. 

In the village through which they passed 
there were red lights and a cheerful smell of 
smoke. 

"What a darling Uncle is!" said Natdsha, 



when they had come out onto the highroad. 

"Yes," returned Nicholas. "You're not cold?" 

"No. I'm quite, quite all right. I feel so com- 
fortable!" answered Natdsha, almost perplexed 
by her feelings. They remained silent a long 
while. The night was dark and damp. They 
could not see the horses, but only heard them 
splashing through the unseen mud. 

What was passing in that receptive childlike 
soul that so eagerly caught and assimilated all 
the diverse impressions of life? How did they 
all find place in her? But she was very happy. 
As they were near ing home she suddenly struck 
up the air of As 'twas growing dark last night- 
the tune of which she had all the way been try- 
ing to get and had at last caught. 

"Got it?" said Nicholas. 

"What were you thinking about just now, 
Nicholas?" inquired Natdsha. 

They were fond of asking one another that 
question. 

"I?" said Nicholas, trying to remember. 
"Well, you see, first I thought that Rugdy, the 
red hound, was like Uncle, and that if he were 
a man he would always keep Uncle near him, 
if not for his riding, then for his manner. What 
a good fellow Uncle is! Don't you think so? ... 
Well, and you?" 

"I? Wait a bit, wait Yes, first I thought 

that we are driving along and imagining that 
we are going home, but that heaven knows 
where we are really going in the darkness, and 
that we shall arrive and suddenly find that we 
are not in Otrddnoe, but in Fairyland. And 
then I thought . . . No, nothing else." 

"I know, I expect you thought of him," said 
Nicholas, smiling as Natdsha knew by the 
sound of his voice. 

"No," said Natdsha, though she had in reali- 
ty been thinking about Prince Andrew at the 
same time as of the rest, and of how he would 
have liked "Uncle." "And then I was saying to 
myself all the way, 'How well Anfsya carried 
herself, how well!' " And Nicholas heard her 
spontaneous, happy, ringing laughter. "And 
do you know," she suddenly said, "I know that 
I shall never again be as happy and tranquil as 
I am now." 

"Rubbish, nonsense, humbug!" exclaimed 
Nicholas, and he thought: "How charming this 
Natdsha of mine is! I have no other friend like 
her and never shall have. Why should she 
marry? We might always drive about together!" 

"What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!" 
thought Natdsha. 

"Ah, there are still lights in the drawing- 



BOOK SEVEN 



291 



room!" she said, pointing to the windows of 
the house that gleamed invitingly in the moist 
velvety darkness of the night. 

CHAPTER VIII 

COUNT ILYA Rosi6v had resigned the position 
of Marshal of the Nobility because it involved 
him in too much expense, but still his affairs 
did not improve. Natasha and Nicholas often 
noticed their parents conferring together anx- 
iously and privately and heard suggestions of 
selling the fine ancestral Rost6v house and es- 
tate near Moscow. It was not necessary to en- 
tertain so freely as when the count had been 
Marshal, and life atOtrddnoe was quieter than 
in former years, but still the enormous house 
and its lodges were full of people and more 
than twenty sat down to table every day. These 
were all their own people who had settled 
down in the house almost as members of the 
family, or persons who were, it seemed, obliged 
to live in the count's house. Such were Dimm- 
ler the musician and his wife, Vogel the 
dancing master and his family, Bel6va, an old 
maiden lady, an inmate of the house, and many 
others such as P&lt;kya's tutors, the girls' former 
governess, and other people who simply found 
it preferable and more advantageous to live in 
the count's house than at home. They had not 
as many visitors as before, but the old habits of 
life without which the count and countess could 
not conceive of existence remained unchanged. 
There was still the hunting establishment 
which Nicholas had even enlarged, the same 
fifty horses and fifteen grooms in the stables, 
the same expensive presents and dinner parr 
ties to the whole district on name days; there 
were still the count's games of whist and bos- 
ton, at whichspreading out his cards so that 
everybody could see them he let himself be 
plundered of hundreds of rubles every day by 
his neighbors, who looked upon an opportu- 
nity to play a rubber with Count Rost6v as a 
most profitable source of income. 

The count moved in his affairs as in a huge 
net, trying not to believe that he was entangled 
but becoming more and more so at every step, 
and feeling too feeble to break the meshes or 
to set to work carefully and patiently to disen- 
tangle them. The countess, with her loving 
heart, felt that her children were being ruined, 
that it was not the count's fault for he could 
not help being what he was that (though he 
tried to hide it) he himself suffered from the 
consciousness of his own and his children's 
ruin, and she tried to find means of remedying 



the position. From her feminine point of view 
she could see only one solution, namely, for 
Nicholas to marry a rich heiress. She felt this to 
be their last hope and that if Nicholas refused 
the match she had found for him, she would 
have to abandon the hope of ever getting mat- 
ters right. This match was with Julie Karagina, 
the daughter of excellent and virtuous parents, 
a girl the Rost6vs had known from childhood, 
and who had now become a wealthy heiress 
through the death of the last of her brothers. 

The countess had written direct to Julie's 
mother in Moscow suggesting a marriage be- 
tween their children and had received a favor- 
able answer from her. Karagina had replied 
that for her part she was agreeable, and every- 
thing would depend on her daughter's incli- 
nation. She invited Nicholas to come to Mos- 
cow. 

Several times the countess, with tears in her 
eyes, told her son that now both her daughters 
were settled, her only wish was to see him mar- 
ried. She said she could lie down in her grave 
peacefully if that were accomplished. Then 
she told him that she knew of a splendid girl 
and tried to discover what he thought about 
marriage. 

At other times she praised Julie to him and 
advised him to go to Moscow during the holi- 
days to amuse himself. Nicholas guessed what 
his mother's remarks were leading to and dur- 
ing one of these conversations induced her to 
speak quite frankly. She told him that her only 
hope of getting their affairs disentangled now 
lay in his marrying Julie Karagina. 

"But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who 
has no fortune, would you expect me to sacri- 
fice my feelings and my honor for the sake of 
money?" he asked his mother, not realizing the 
cruelty of his question and only wishing to 
show his noble-mindedness. 

"No, you have not understood me," said his 
mother, not knowing how to justify herself. 
"You have not understood me, Nikolenka. It 
is your happiness I wish for," she added, feel- 
ing that she was telling an untruth and was 
becoming entangled. She began to cry. 

"Mamma, don't cry! Only tell me that you 
wish it, and you know I will give my life, any- 
thing, to put you at ease," said Nicholas. "I 
would sacrifice any thing for you even my feel- 
ings." 

But the countess did not want the question 
put like that: she did not want a sacrifice from 
her son, she herself wished to make a sacrifice 
for him. 



2Q2 



WAR AND PEACE 



"No, you have not understood me, don't let 
us talk about it," she replied, wiping away her 
tears. 

"Maybe I do love a poor girl," said Nicholas 
to himself. "Am I to sacrifice my feelings and 
my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma 
could speak so to me. Because S6nya is poor I 
must not love her," he thought, "must not re- 
spond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I 
should certainly be happier with her than with 
some doll-like Julie. I can always sacrifice my 
feelings for my family's welfare," he said to 
himself, "but I can't coerce my feelings. If I 
love Sonya, that feeling is for me stronger and 
higher than all else." 

Nicholas did not go to Moscow, and the 
countess did not renew the conversation with 
him about marriage. She saw with sorrow, and 
sometimes with exasperation, symptoms of a 
growing attachment between her son and the 
portionless Sonya. Though she blamed herself 
for it, she could not refrain from grumbling at 
and worrying Sonya, often pulling herup with- 
out reason, addressing her stiffly as "my dear," 
and using the formal "you" instead of the inti- 
mate "thou" in speaking to her. The kind- 
hearted countess was the more vexed with Son- 
ya because that poor, dark-eyed niece of hers 
was so meek, so kind, so devotedly grateful to 
her benefactors, and so faithfully, unchanging- 
ly, and unselfishly in love with Nicholas, that 
there were no grounds for finding fault with 
her. 

Nicholas was spending the last of his leave 
at home. A fourth letter had come from Prince 
Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that 
he would have been on his way back to Russia 
long ago had not his wound unexpectedly re- 
opened in the warm climate, which obliged 
him to defer his return till the beginning of 
the new year. Natdsha was still as much in love 
with her betrothed, found the same comfort in 
that love, and was still as ready to throw her- 
self into all the pleasures of life as before; but 
at the end of the fourth month of their separa- 
tion she began to have fits of depression which 
she could not master. She felt sorry for herself: 
sorry that she was being wasted all this time 
and of no use to anyonewhile she felt herself 
so capable of loving and being loved. 

Things were not cheerful in the Rost6vs* 
home. 

CHAPTER IX 

CHRISTMAS CAME and except for the ceremonial 
Mass, the solemn and wearisome Christmas 



congratulations from neighbors and servants, 
and the new dresses everyone put on, there 
were no special festivities, though the calm 
frost of twenty degrees Reaumur, 1 the dazzling 
sunshine by day, and the starlight of the win- 
ter nights seemed to call for some special cele- 
bration of the season. 

On the third day of Christmas week, after 
the midday dinner, all the inmates of the house 
dispersed to various rooms. It was the dullest 
time of the day. Nicholas, who had been visit- 
ing some neighbors that morning, was asleep 
on the sitting-room sofa. The old count was 
resting in his study. Sonya sat in the drawing 
room at the round table, copying a design for 
embroidery. The countess was play ing patience. 
Nastasya Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad 
face at the window with two old ladies. Nata- 
sha came into the room, went up to S6nya, 
glanced at what she was doing, and then went 
up to her mother and stood without speaking. 

"Why are you wandering about like an out- 
cast?" asked her mother. "What do you want?" 

"Him ... I want him . . . now, this minute! I 
want him!" said Natasha, with glittering eyes 
and no sign of a smile. 

The countess lifted her head and looked at- 
tentively at her daughter. 

"Don't look at me, Mamma! Don't look; I 
shall cry directly." 

"Sit down with me a little," said the count- 
ess. 

"Mamma, I want him. Why should I be 
wasted like this, Mamma?" 

Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, 
and she turned quickly to hide them and left 
the room. 

She passed into the sitting room, stood there 
thinking awhile, and then went into the maids' 
room. There an old maidservant was grum- 
bling at a young girl who stood panting, hav- 
ing just run in through the cold from the serfs' 
quarters. 

"Stop playing there's a time for everything," 
said the old woman. 

"Let her alone, Kondratevna," said Natdsha. 
"Go, Mavrushka, go." 

Having released Mavrushka, Natasha crossed 
the dancing hall and went to the vestibule. 
There an old footman and two young ones 
were playing cards. They broke off and rose as 
she entered. 

"What can I do with them?" thought Natd- 
sha. 

"Oh, Nikita, please go ... where can I send 

1 13 degrees below zero, Fahrenheit. TR. 



BOOK SEVEN 



293 



him? . . . Yes, go to the yard and fetch a fowl, 
please, a cock, and you, Mfsha, bring me some 
oats. M l 

"Just a few oats?" said Mfsha, cheerfully and 
readily. 

"Go, go quickly," the old man urged him. 

"And you, Theodore, get me a piece of 
chalk." 

On her way past the butler's pantry she told 
them to set a samovar, though it was not at all 
the time for tea. 

F6ka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered 
person in the house. Natasha liked to test her 
power over him. He distrusted the order and 
asked whether the samovar was really wanted. 

"Oh dear, what a young lady!" said F6ka, 
pretending to frown at Natdsha. 

No one in the house sent people about or 
gave them as much trouble as Natdsha did. She 
could not see people unconcernedly, but had 
to send them on some errand. She seemed to 
be trying whether any of them would get angry 
or sulky with her; but the serfs fulfilled no 
one's orders so readily as they did hers. "What 
can I do, where can I go?" thought she, as she 
went slowly along the passage. 

"Nastdsya Ivdnovna, what sort of children 
shall I have?" she asked the buffoon, who was 
coming toward her in a woman's jacket. 

"Why, fleas, crickets, grasshoppers," an- 
swered the buffoon. 

"O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, 
where am I to go? What am I to do with my- 
self?" And tapping with her heels, she ran 
quickly upstairs to see Vogel and his wife who 
lived on the upper story. 

Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels 
at a table, on which were plates of raisins, wal- 
nuts, and almonds. The governesses were dis- 
cussing whether it was cheaper to live in Mos- 
cow or Odessa. Natdsha sat down, listened to 
their talk with a serious and thoughtful air, 
and then got up again. 

"The island of Madagascar," she said, "Ma- 
da-gas-car," she repeated, articulating each syl- 
lable distinctly, and, not replying to Madame 
Schoss who asked her what she was saying, she 
went out of the room. 

Her brother Ptya was upstairs too; with the 
man in attendance on him he was preparing 
fireworks to let off that night. 

"Ptya! Ptya!" she called to him. "Carry me 
downstairs." 

1 Feeding a fowl with grain arranged on the 
floor is a way of telling fortunes at Christmastime. 
-TR. 



Ptya ran up and offered her his back. She 
jumped on it, putting her arms round his neck, 
and he pranced along with her. 

"No, don't . . . the island of Madagascar!" 
she said, and jumping off his back she went 
downstairs. 

Having as it were reviewed her kingdom, 
tested her power, and made sure that everyone 
was submissive, but that all the same it was 
dull, Natdsha betook herself to the ballroom, 
picked up her guitar, sat down in a dark corner 
behind a bookcase, and began to run her fin- 
gers over the strings in the bass, picking out a 
passage she recalled from an opera she had 
heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew. What 
she drew from the guitar would have had no 
meaning for other listeners, but in her imagi- 
nation a whole series of reminiscences arose 
from those sounds. She sat behind the book- 
case with her eyes fixed on a streak of light es- 
caping from the pantry door and listened to 
herself and pondered. She was in a mood for 
brooding on the past. 

Sonya passed to the pantry with a glass in 
her hand. Natdsha glanced at her and at the 
crack in the pantry door, and it seemed to her 
that she remembered the light falling through 
that crack once before and Sonya passing with 
a glass in her hand. "Yes, it was exactly the 
same," thought Natasha. 

"S6nya, what is this?" she cried, twanging a 
thick string. 

"Oh, you are there!" said S6nya with a start, 
and came near and listened. "I don't know. A 
storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid of being 
wrong. 

"There! That's just how she started and just 
how she came up smiling timidly when all this 
happened before," thought Natdsha, "and in 
just the same way I thought there was some- 
thing lacking in her." 

"No, it's the chorus from The Water-Carrier, 
listen!" and Natdsha sang the air of the chorus 
so that Sonya should catch it. "Where were you 
going?" she asked. 

"To change the water in this glass. I am just 
finishing the design." 

"You always find something to do, but I 
can't," said Natdsha. "And where's Nicholas?" 

"Asleep, I think." 

"S6nya, go and wake him," said Natdsha. 
"Tell him I want him to come and sing." 

She sat awhile, wondering what the mean- 
ing of it all having happened before could be, 
and without solving this problem, or at all re- 
gretting not having done so, she again passed 



294 

in fancy to the time when she was with him 

and he was looking at her with a lover's eyes. 

"Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so 
afraid it will never be! And, worst of all, I am 
growing oldthat's the thing! There won't 
then be in me what there is now. But perhaps 
he'll come today, will come immediately. Per- 
haps he has come and is sitting in the drawing 
room. Perhaps he came yesterday and I have 
forgotten it." She rose, put down the guitar, 
and went to the drawing room. 

All the domestic circle, tutors, governesses, 
and guests, were already at the tea table. The 
servants stood round the tablebut Prince An- 
drew was not there and life was going on as be- 
fore. 

"Ah, here she is!" said the old count, when 
he saw Natasha enter. "Well, sit down by me." 
But Natasha stayed by her mother and glanced 
round as if looking for something. 

"Mamma!" she muttered, "give him to me, 
give him, Mamma, quickly, quickly!" and she 
again had difficulty in repressing her sobs. 

She sat down at the table and listened to the 
conversation between the elders and Nicholas, 
who had also come to the table. "My God, my 
God! The same faces, the same talk, Papa hold- 
ing his cup and blowing in the same way!" 
thought Natasha, feeling with horror a sense 
of repulsion rising up in her for the whole 
household, because they were always the same. 

After tea, Nicholas, Sonya, and Natdshawent 
to the sitting room, to their favorite corner 
where their most intimate talks always began. 

CHAPTER X 

DOES IT EVER HAPPEN TO YOU," said Natdsha to 
her brother, when they settled down in the sit- 
ting room, "does it ever happen to you to feel 
as if there were nothing more to come noth- 
ing; that everything good is past? And to feel 
not exactly dull, but sad?" 

"I should think so!" he replied. "I have felt 
like that when everything was all right and 
everyone was cheerful. The thought has come 
into my mind that I was already tired of it all, 
and that we must all die. Once in the regiment 
I had not gone to some merrymaking where 
there was music . . . and suddenly 1 felt so de- 
pressed ..." 

"Oh yes, I know, I know, I know!" Natdsha 
interrupted him. "When I was quite little that 
used to be so with me. Do you remember when 
I was punished once about some plums? You 
were all dancing, and I sat sobbing in the 
schoolroom? I shall never forget it: I felt sad 



WAR AND PEACE 

and sorry for everyone, for myself, and for 
everyone. And I was innocent that was the 
chief thing," said Natdsha. "Do you remem- 
ber?" 

"I remember," answered Nicholas. "I re- 
member that I came to you afterwards and 
wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I felt 
ashamed to. We were terribly absurd. I had a 
funny doll then and wanted to give it to you. 
Do you remember?" 

"And do you remember," Natasha asked with 
a pensive smile, "how once, long, long ago, 
when we were quite little, Uncle called us into 
the study that was in the old house and it 
was dark we went in and suddenly there 
stood . . ." 

"A Negro," chimed in Nicholas with a smile 
of delight. "Of course I remember. Even now 
I don't know whether there really was a Negro, 
or if we only dreamed it or were told about 
him." 

"He was gray, you remember, and had white 
teeth, and stood and looked at us. . . ." 

"Sonya, do you remember?" asked Nicholas. 

"Yes, yes, I do remember something too," 
S6nya answered timidly. 

"You know I have asked Papa and Mamma 
about that Negro," said Natasha, "and they say 
there was no Negro at all. But you see, you re- 
member!" 

"Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I 
had just seen them." 

"How strange it is! It's as if it were a dream! I 
like that." 

"And do you remember how we rolled hard- 
boiled eggs in the ballroom, and suddenly two 
old women began spinning round on the car- 
pet? Was that real or not? Do you remember 
what fun it was?" 

"Yes, and you remember how Papa in his 
blue overcoat fired a gun in the porch?" 

So they went through their memories, smil- 
ing with pleasure: not the sad memories of old 
age, but poetic, youthful ones those impres- 
sions of one's most distant past in which dreams 
and realities blend and they laughed with 
quiet enjoyment. 

S6nya, as always, did not quite keep pace 
with them, though they shared the same remi- 
niscences. 

Much that they remembered had slipped 
from her mind, and what she recalled did not 
arouse the same poetic feeling as they experi- 
enced. She simply enjoyed their pleasure and 
tried to fit in with it. 

She only really took part when they recalled 



BOOK SEVEN 



S6nya's first arrival. She told them how afraid 
she had been of Nicholas because he had on a 
corded jacket and her nurse had told her that 
she, too, would be sewn up with cords. 

"And I remember their telling me that you 
had been born under a cabbage," said Natdsha, 
"and I remember that I dared not disbelieve it 
then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt 
so uncomfortable." 

While they were talking a maid thrust her 
head in at the other door of the sitting room. 

"They have brought the cock, Miss," she 
said in a whisper. 

"It isn't wanted, P61ya. Tell them to take it 
away," replied Natdsha. 

In the middle of their talk in the sitting 
room, Dimmler came in and went up to the 
harp that stood there in a corner. He took off 
its cloth covering, and the harp gave out a jar- 
ring sound. 

"Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite noc- 
turne by Field," came the old countess' voice 
from the drawing room. 

Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Na- 
tasha, Nicholas, and Sonya, remarked: "How 
quiet you young people are!" 

"Yes, we're philosophizing," said Natdsha, 
glancing round for a moment and then con- 
tinuing the conversation. They were now dis- 
cussing dreams. 

Dimmler began to play; Natasha went on 
tiptoe noiselessly to the table, took up a can- 
dle, carried it out, and returned, seating her- 
self quietly in her former place. It was dark in 
the room especially where they were sitting on 
the sofa, but through the big windows the sil- 
very light of the full moon fell on the floor. 
Dimmler had finished the piece but still sat 
softly running his fingers over the strings, evi- 
dently uncertain whether to stop or to play 
something else. 

"Do you know," said Natdsha in a whisper, 
moving closer to Nicholas and S6nya, "that 
when one goes on and on recalling memories, 
one at last begins to remember what happened 
before one was in the world " 

"That is metempsychosis," said S6nya, who 
had always learned well, and remembered 
everything. "The Egyptians believed that our 
souls have lived in animals, and will go back 
into animals again." 

"No, I don't believe we ever were in ani- 
mals," said Natdsha, still in a whisper though 
the music had ceased. "But I am certain that 
we were angels somewhere there, and have been 
here, and that is why we remember. . . ." 



"May I join you?" said Dimmler who had 
come up quietly, and he sat down by them. 

"If we have been angels, why have we fallen 
lower?" said Nicholas. "No, that can't be!" 

"Not lower, who said we were lower? . . . 
How do I know what I was before?" Natdsha 
rejoined with conviction. "The soul is immor- 
talwell then, if I shall always live I must have 
lived before, lived for a whole eternity." 

"Yes, but it is hard for us to imagine eter- 
nity," remarked Dimmler, who had joined the 
young folk with a mildly condescending smile 
but now spoke as quietly and seriously as they. 

"Why is it hard to imagine eternity?" said 
Natasha. "It is now today, and it will be to- 
morrow, and always; and there was yesterday, 
and the day before. . . ." 

"Natdsha! Now it's your turn. Sing me some- 
thing," they heard the countess say. "Why are 
you sitting there like conspirators?" 

"Mamma, I don't at all want to," replied 
Natdsha, but all the same she rose. 

None of them, not even the middle-aged 
Dimmler, wanted to break off their conversa- 
tion and quit that corner in the sitting room, 
but Natdsha got up and Nicholas sat down at 
the clavichord. Standing as usual in the mid- 
dle of the hall and choosing the place where 
the resonance was best, Natdsha began to sing 
her mother's favorite song. 

She had said she did not want to sing, but it 
was long since she had sung, and long before 
she again sang, as she did that evening. The 
count, from his study where he was talking to 
Mitenka, heard her and, like a schoolboy in a 
hurry to run out to play, blundered in his talk 
while giving orders to the steward, and at last 
stopped, while Mftenka stood in front of him 
also listening and smiling. Nicholas did not 
take his eyes off his sister and drew breath in 
time with her. Sonya, as she listened, thought 
of the immense difference there was between 
herself and her friend, and how impossible it 
was for her to be anything like as bewitching 
as her cousin. The old countess sat with a bliss- 
ful yet sad smile and with tears in her eyes, oc- 
casionally shaking her head. She thought of 
Natdsha and of her own youth, and of how 
there was something unnatural and dreadful 
in this impending marriage of Natdsha and 
Prince Andrew. 

Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the 
countess, listened with closed eyes. 

"Ah, Countess," he said at last, "that's a Euro- 
pean talent, she has nothing to learn what 
softness, tenderness, and strength. . . ." 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Ah, how afraid I am for her, how afraid I 
ami" said the countess, not realizing to whom 
she was speaking. Her maternal instinct told 
her that Natisha had too much of something, 
and that because of this she would not be hap- 
py. Before Natdsha had finished singing, four- 
teen-year-old Ptya rushed in delightedly, to 
say that some mummers had arrived. 

Natasha stopped abruptly. 

"Idiot I" she screamed at her brother and, 
running to a chair, threw herself on it, sobbing 
so violently that she could not stop for a long 
time. 

"It's nothing, Mamma, really it's nothing; 
only P^tya startled me," she said, trying to 
smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs still 
choked her. 

The mummers (some of the house serfs) 
dressed up as bears, Turks, innkeepers, and 
ladiesfrightening and funny bringing in 
with them the cold from outside and a feeling 
of gaiety, crowded, at first timidly, into the 
anteroom, then hiding behind one another they 
pushed into the ballroom where, shyly at first 
and then more and more merrily and heartily, 
they started singing, dancing, and playing 
Christmas games. The countess, when she had 
identified them and laughed at their costumes, 
went into the drawing room. The count sat in 
the ballroom, smiling radiantly and applaud- 
ing the players. The young people had disap- 
peared. 

Half an hour later there appeared among 
the other mummers in the ballroom an old 
lady in a hooped skirt this was Nicholas. A 
Turkish girl was P^tya. A clown was Dimmler. 
An hussar was Natasha, and a Circassian was 
S6nya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows. 

After the condescending surprise, nonrecog- 
nition, and praise, from those who were not 
themselves dressed up, the young people de- 
cided that their costumes were so good that 
they ought to be shown elsewhere. 

Nicholas, who, as the roads were in splendid 
condition, wanted to take them all for a drive 
in his troyka, proposed to take with them about 
a dozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Un- 
cle's." 

"No, why disturb the old fellow?" said the 
countess. "Besides, you wouldn't have room to 
turn round there. If you must go, go to the 
Melyuk6vs'." 

Melyuk6va was a widow, who, with her fami- 
ly and their tutors and governesses, lived three 
miles from the Rost6vs. 

"That's right, my dear," chimed in the old 



count, thoroughly aroused. "I'll dress up at 
once and go with them. I'll make Pashetteopen 
her eyes." 

But the countess would not agree to his go- 
ing; he had had a bad leg all these last days. It 
was decided that the count must not go, but 
that if Louisa Ivdnovna (Madame Schoss) 
would go with them, the young ladies might go 
to the Melyuk6vs', S6nya, generally so timid 
and shy, more urgently than anyone begging 
Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse. 

S6nya's costume was the best of all. Her mus- 
tache and eyebrows were extraordinarily be- 
coming. Everyone told her she looked very 
handsome, and she was in a spirited a-nd ener- 
getic mood unusual with her. Some inner voice 
told her that now or never her fate would be 
decided, and in her male attire she seemed 
quite a different person. Louisa Ivdnovna con- 
sented to go, and in half an hour four troyka 
sleighs with large and small bells, their run- 
ners squeaking and whistling over the frozen 
snow, drove up to the porch. 

Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holi- 
day tone, which, passing from one to another, 
grew stronger and stronger and reached its 
climax when they all came out into the frost 
and got into the sleighs, talking, calling to one 
another, laughing, and shouting. 

Two of the troykas were the usual house- 
hold sleighs, the third was the old count's with 
a trotter from the Orl6v stud as shaft horse, 
the fourth was Nicholas* own with a short shag- 
gy black shaft horse. Nicholas, in his old lady's 
dress over which he had belted his hussar over- 
coat, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in 
hand. 

It was so light that he could see the moon- 
light reflected from the metal harness disks 
and from the eyes of the horses, who looked 
round in alarm at the noisy party under the 
shadow of the porch roof. 

Natdsha, S6nya, Madame Schoss, and two 
maids got into Nicholas' sleigh; Dimmler, his 
wife, and Ptya, into the old count's, and the 
rest of the mummers seated themselves in the 
other two sleighs. 

"You go ahead, Zakhdrl" shouted Nicholas 
to his father's coachman, wishing for a chance 
to race past him. 

The old count's troyka, with Dimmler and 
his party, started forward, squeaking on its 
runners as though freezing to the snow, its 
deep-toned bell clanging. The side horses, 
pressing against the shafts of the middle 
horse, sank in the snow, which was dry and 



BOOK SEVEN 



glittered like sugar, and threw it up. 

Nicholas set off, following the first sleigh; 
behind him the others moved noisily, their 
runners squeaking. At first they drove at a 
steady trot along the narrow road. While they 
drove past the garden the shadows of the bare 
trees often fell across the road and hid the 
brilliant moonlight, but as soon as they were 
past the fence, the snowy plain bathed in moon- 
light and motionless spread out before them 
glittering like diamonds and dappled with 
bluish shadows. Bang, bang! went the first 
sleigh over a cradle hole in the snow of the 
road, and each of the other sleighs jolted in 
the same way, and rudely breaking the frost- 
bound stillness, the troykas began to speed 
along the road, one after the other. 

"A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" rang out Na- 
tAsha's voice through the frost-bound air. 

"How light it is, Nicholas!" came S6nya's 
voice. 

Nicholas glanced round at S6nya, and bent 
down to see her face closer. Quite a new, sweet 
face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped 
up at him from her sable furs so close and yet 
so distant in the moonlight. 

"That used to be S6nya," thought he, and 
looked at her closer and smiled. 

"What is it, Nicholas?" 

"Nothing," said he and turned again to the 
horses. 

When they came out onto the beaten high- 
roadpolished by sleigh runners and cut up 
by rough-shod hoofs, the marks of which were 
visible in the moonlight the horses began to 
tug at the reins of their own accord and in- 
creased their pace. The near side horse, arch- 
ing his head and breaking into a short canter, 
tugged at his traces. The shaft horse swayed 
from side to side, moving his ears as if asking: 
"Isn't it time to begin now?" In front, already 
far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing 
farther and farther off, the black horses driven 
by Zakhar could be clearly seen against the 
white snow. From that sleigh one could hear 
the shouts, laughter, and voices of the mum- 
mers. 

"Gee up, my darlings!" shouted Nicholas, 
pulling the reins to one side and flourishing 
the whip. 

It was only by the keener wind that met 
them and the jerks given by the side horses 
who pulled harder ever increasing their gal- 
lopthat one noticed how fast the troyka was 
flying. Nicholas looked back. With screams, 
squeals, and waving of whips that caused even 



the shaft horses to gallop the other sleighs fol- 
lowed. The shaft horse swung steadily beneath 
the bow over its head, with no thought of 
slackening pace and ready to put on speed 
when required. 

Nicholas overtook the first sleigh. They were 
driving downhill and coming out upon a broad 
trodden track across a meadow, near a river. 

"Where are we?" thought he. "It's the Kos6y 
meadow, I suppose. But no this is something 
new I've never seen before. This isn't the Ko- 
soy meadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven 
only knows what it is! It is something new and 
enchanted. Well, whatever it may be . . ." And 
shouting to his horses, he began to pass the first 
sleigh. 

Zakhar held back his horses and turned his 
face, which was already covered with hoarfrost 
to his eyebrows. 

Nicholas gave the horses the rein, and Zak- 
hdr, stretching out his arms, clucked his tongue 
and let his horses go. 

"Now, look out, master!" he cried. 

Faster still the two troykas flew side by side, 
and faster moved the feet of the galloping side 
horses. Nicholas began to draw ahead. Zakhar, 
while still keeping his arms extended, raised 
one hand with the reins. 

"No you won't, master!" he shouted. 

Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and 
passed Zakhar. The horses showered the fine 
dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh 
beside them sounded quick ringing bells and 
they caught confused glimpses of swiftly mov- 
ing legs and the shadows of the troyka they 
were passing. The whistling sound of the run- 
ners on the snow and the voices of girls shriek- 
ing were heard from different sides. 

Again checking his horses, Nicholas looked 
around him. They were still surrounded by the 
magic plain bathed in moonlight andspangled 
with stars. 

"Zakhdr is shouting that I should turn to the 
left, but why to the left?" thought Nicholas. 
"Are we getting to the Melyuk6vs'? Is this Mel- 
yukovka? Heaven only knows where we are go- 
ing, and heaven knows what is happening to 
us but ft is very strange and pleasant what- 
ever it is." And he looked round in the sleigh. 

"Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all 
white!" said one of the strange, pretty, unfa- 
miliar people the one with fine eyebrows and 
mustache. 

"I think this used to be Natasha," thought 
Nicholas, "and that was Madame Schoss, but 
perhaps it's not, and this Circassian with the 



WAR AND PEACE 



mustache I don't know, but I love her." 

"Aren't you cold?" he asked. 

They did not answer but began to laugh. 
Dimmler from the sleigh behind shouted some- 
thing probably something funny but they 
could not make out what he said. 

"Yes, yes!" some voices answered, laughing. 

"But here was a fairy forest with black mov- 
ing shadows, and a glitter of diamonds and a 
flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of 
fairy buildings and the shrill yells of some ani- 
mals. And if this is really Melyuk6vka, it is still 
stranger that we drove heaven knows where 
and have come to Melyuk6vka," thought Nich- 
olas. 

It really was Melyuk6vka, and maids and 
footmen with merry faces came running out to 
the porch carrying candles. 

"Who is it?" asked someone in the porch, 

"The mummers from the count's. I know by 
the horses," replied some voices. 

CHAPTER XI 

PELAGYA DANILOVNA MELYUK6vA, a broadly 
built, energetic woman wearing spectacles, sat 
in the drawing room in a loose dress, sur- 
rounded by her daughters whom she was try- 
ing to keep from feeling dull. They were quiet- 
ly dropping melted wax into snow and looking 
at the shadows the wax figures would throw on 
the wall, when they heard the steps and voices 
of new arrivals in the vestibule. 

Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, and bears, 
after clearing their throats and wiping the 
hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule, 
came into the ballroom where candles were 
hurriedly lighted. The clown Dimmler and 
the lady Nicholas started a dance. Sur- 
rounded by the screaming children the mum- 
mers, covering their faces and disguising their 
voices, bowed to their hostess and arranged 
themselves about the room. 

"Dear me! there's no recognizing them! And 
Natdsha! See whom she looks like! She really 
reminds me of somebody. But Herr Dimmler 
isn't he good! I didn't know him! And how 
he dances. Dear me, there's a Circassian. Real- 
ly, how becoming it is to dear S6nya. And who 
is that? Well, you have cheered us up! Nikfta 
and Vdnya clear away the tables! And we 
were sitting so quietly. Ha, ha, ha! ... The 
hussar, the hussar! Just like a boy! And the 
legs! ... I can't look at him . . ." different 
voices were saying. 

Natdsha, the young Melyuk6vs' favorite, dis- 
appeared with them into the back rooms where 



a cork and various dressing gowns and male 
garments were called for arid received from 
the footman by bare girlish arms from behind 
the door. Ten minutes later, all the young Mel- 
yuk6vs joined the mummers. 

Pelage*ya Danflovna, having given orders to 
clear the rooms for the visitors and arranged 
about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs, 
went about among the mummers without re- 
moving her spectacles, peering into their faces 
with a suppressed smile and failing to recog- 
nize any of them. It was not merely Dimmler 
and the Rost6vs she failed to recognize, she did 
not even recognize her own daughters, or her 
late husband's dressing gowns and uniforms, 
which they had put on. 

"And who is this?" she asked her governess, 
peering into the face of her own daughter 
dressed up as a Kazdn-Tartar. "I suppose it is 
one of theRost6vs! Well, Mr. Hussar, and what 
regiment do you serve in?" she asked Natasha. 
"Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" she 
ordered the butler who was handing things 
round. "That's not forbidden by his law." 

Sometimes, as she looked at the strange but 
amusing capers cut by the dancers, who hav- 
ing decided once for all that being disguised, 
no one would recognize them were not at all 
shy, Pclage'ya Danflovna hid her face in her 
handkerchief, and her whole stout body shook 
with irrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter. 

"My little Sasha! Look at Sdsha!" she said. 

After Russian country dances and chorus 
dances, Pelagdya Danflovna made the serfs and 
gentry join in one large circle: a ring, a string, 
and a silver ruble were fetched and they all 
played games together. 

In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled 
and disordered. The corked eyebrows and mus- 
taches were smeared over the perspiring, 
flushed, and merry faces. Pelage"ya Danilovna 
began to recognize the mummers, admired 
their cleverly contrived costumes, and particu- 
larly how they suited the young ladies, and she 
thanked them all for having entertained her 
so well. The visitors were invited to supper in 
the drawing room, and the serfs had something 
served to them in the ballroom. 

"Now to tell one's fortune in the empty bath- 
house is frightening!" said an old maid who 
lived with the Melyuk6vs, during supper. 

"Why?" said the eldest Melyuk6v girl. 

"You wouldn't go, it takes courage. . . ." 

"I'll go," said S6nya. 

"Tell what happened to the young lady!" 
said the second Melyuktiv girl. 



BOOK SEVEN 



*99 



"Well," began the old maid, "a young lady 
once went out, took a cock, laid the table for 
two, all properly, and sat down. After sitting a 
while, she suddenly hears someone coming . . . 
a sleigh drives up with harness bells; she hears 
him coming! He comes in, just in the shape of 
a man, like an officer comes in and sits down 
to table with her." 

"Ah! ah!" screamed Natdsha, rolling her 
eyes with horror. 

"Yes? And how . . . did he speak?" 

"Yes, like a man. Everything quite all right, 
and he began persuading her; and she should 
have kept him talking till cockcrow, but shegot 
frightened, just got frightened and hid her face 
in her hands. Then he caught her up. It was 
lucky the maids ran in just then. . . ." 

"Now, why frighten them?" said Pelagdya 
Danflovna. 

"Mamma, you used to try your fate your- 
self . . ." said her daughter. 

"And how does one do it in a barn?" in- 
quired S6nya. 

"Well, say you went to the barn now, and lis- 
tened. It depends on what you hear; hammer- 
ing and knocking that's bad; but a sound of 
shifting grain is good and one sometimes hears 
that, too." 

"Mamma, tell us what happened to you in 
the barn." 

Pelagya Danilovna smiled. 

"Oh, I've forgotten . . ." she replied. "But 
none of you would go?" 

"Yes, I will; Pelag^ya Danilovna, let mel I'll 
go," said S6nya. 

"Well, why not, if you're not afraid?" 

"Louisa Ivanovna, may I?" asked S6nya. 

Whether they were playing the ring and 
string game or the ruble game or talking as 
now, Nicholas did not leave S6nya's side, and 
gazed at her with quite new eyes. It seemed to 
him that it was only today, thanks to that burnt- 
cork mustache, that he had fully learned to 
know her. And really, that evening, S6nya was 
brighter, more animated, and prettier than 
Nicholas had ever seen her before. 

"So that's what she is like; what a fool I have 
been!" he thought gazing at her sparkling eyes, 
and under the mustache a happy rapturous 
smile dimpled her cheeks, a smile he had never 
seen before. 

"I'm not afraid of anything," said S6nya. 
"May I go at once?" She got up. 

They told her where the barn was and how 
she should stand and listen, and they handed 
her a fur cloak. She threw this over her head 



and shoulders and glanced at Nicholas. 

"What a darling that girl is!" thought he. 
"And what have I been thinking of till now?" 

S6nya went out into the passage to go to the 
barn. Nicholas went hastily to the front porch, 
saying he felt too hot. The crowd of people 
really had made the house stuffy. 

Outside, there was the same cold stillness and 
the same moon, but even brighter than before. 
The light was so strong and the snow sparkled 
with so many stars that one did not wish to 
look up at the sky and the real stars were un- 
noticed. The sky was black and dreary, while 
the earth was gay. 

"I am a fool, a fool! what have I been wait- 
ing for?" thought Nicholas, and running out 
from the porch he went round the corner of 
the house and along the path that led to the 
back porch. He knew Sonya would pass that 
way. Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of 
firewood and across and along them a network 
of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on 
the snow and on the path. This path led to the 
barn. The log walls of the barn and its snow- 
covered roof, that looked as if hewn out of 
some precious stone, sparkled in the moon- 
light. A tree in the garden snapped with the 
frost, and then all was again perfectly silent. 
His bosom seemed to inhale not air but the 
strength of eternal youth and gladness. 

From the back porch came the sound of feet 
descending the steps, the bottom step upon 
which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and 
he heard the voice of an old maidservant say- 
ing, "Straight, straight, along the path, Miss. 
Only, don't look back." 

"I am not afraid," answered S6nya's voice, 
and along the path toward Nicholas came the 
crunching, whistling sound of S6nya's feet in 
her thin shoes. 

S6nya came along, wrapped in her cloak. 
She was only a couple of paces away when she 
saw him, and to her too he was not the Nich- 
olas she had known and always slightly feared. 
He was in a woman's dress, with tousled hair 
and a happy smile new to S6nya.Sheran rapid- 
ly toward him. 

"Quite different and yet the same," thought 
Nicholas, looking at her face all lit up by the 
moonlight. He slipped his arms under the 
cloak that covered her head, embraced her, 
pressed her to him, and kissed her on the lips 
that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt 
cork. S6nya kissed him full on the lips, and 
disengaging her little hands pressed them to 
his cheeks. 



goo 



WAR AND PEACE 



"S6nya!" . . . "Nicholas!" . . . was all they 
said. They ran to the barn and then back 
again, re-entering, he by the front and she 
by the back porch. 

CHAPTER XII 

WHEN THEY ALL DROVE BACK from Pelage*ya 
Danilovna's, Natasha, who always saw and no- 
ticed everything, arranged that she and Ma- 
dame Schoss should go back in the sleigh with 
Dimmler, and Sonya with Nicholas and the 
maids. 

On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady 
pace instead of racing and kept peering by that 
fantastic all-transforming light into S6nya's 
face and searching beneath the eyebrows and 
mustache for his former and his present Sonya 
from whom he had resolved never to be parted 
again. He looked and recognizing in her both 
the old and the newS6nya,andbeingreminded 
by the smell of burnt cork of the sensation of 
her kiss, inhaled the frosty air with a lull breast 
and, looking at the ground flying beneath him 
and at the sparkling sky, felt himself again in 
fairyland. 

"Sonya, is it well with thee?" he asked from 
time to time. 

"Yes!" she replied. "And with thee?" 

When halfway home Nicholas handed the 
reins to the coachman and ran for a moment 
to Natasha's sleigh and stood on its wing. 

"Natasha!" he whispered in French, "do you 
know I have made up my mind about Sonya?" 

"Have you told her?" asked Natasha, sud- 
denly beaming all over with joy. 

"Oh, how strange you are with that mus- 
tache and those eyebrows! . . . Natasha are 
you glad?" 

"I am so glad, so glad! I was beginning to be 
vexed with you. I did not tell you, but you have 
been treating her badly. What a heart she has, 
Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was 
ashamed to be happy while Sonya was not," 
continued Natasha. "Now I am so glad! Well, 
run back to her." 

"No, wait a bit. . . . Oh, how funny you look!" 
cried Nicholas, peering into her face and find- 
ing in his sister too something new, unusual, 
and bewitchingly tender that he had not seen 
in her before. "Natlsha, it's magical, isn't it?" 

"Yes/' she replied. "You have done splendid- 
ly." 

"Had I seen her before as she is now," thought 
Nicholas, "I should long ago have asked her 
what to do and have done whatever she told 
me, and all would have been well." 



"So you are glad and I have done right?" 

"Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mam- 
ma some time ago about it. Mamma said she 
was angling for you. How could she say such a 
thing! I nearly stormed at Mamma. I will never 
let anyone say anything bad of S6nya, for there 
is nothing but good in her." 

"Then it's all right?" said Nicholas, again 
scrutinizing the expression of his sister's face 
to see if she was in earnest. Then he jumped 
down and, his boots scrunching the snow, ran 
back to his sleigh. The same happy, smilingCir- 
cassian, with mustache and beaming eyes look- 
ing up from under a sablehood, was still sitting 
there, and that Circassian was S6nya, and that 
Scmya was certainly his future happy and lov- 
ing wife. 

When they reached home and had told their 
mother how they had spent the evening at the 
Melyukrivs', the girls went to their bedroom. 
When they had undressed, but without wash- 
ing off the cork mustaches, they sat a long time 
talking of their happiness. They talked of how 
they would live when they were married, how 
their husbands would be friends, and how hap- 
py they would be. On Natasha's table stood 
two looking glasses which Dunydsha had pre- 
pared beforehand. 

"Only when will all that be? I am afraid nev- 
er. ... It would be too good!" said Natdsha, 
rising and going to the looking glasses. 

"Sit down, Natasha; perhaps you'll see him," 
said Sonya. 

Natasha lit the candles, one on each side of 
one of the looking glasses, and sat down. 

"I see someone with a mustache," said Na- 
tasha, seeing her own face. 

"You mustn't laugh, Miss," said Dunyasha. 

With S6nya's help and the maid's, Natdsha 
got the glass she held into the right position 
opposite the other; her face assumed a serious 
expression and she sat silent. She sat a long 
time looking at the receding line of candles re- 
flected in the glasses and expecting (from tales 
she had heard) to see a coffin, or him, Prince 
Andrew, in that last dim, indistinctly outlined 
square. But ready as she was to take the small- 
est speck for the image of a man or of a coffin, 
she saw nothing. She began blinking rapidly 
and moved away from the looking glasses. 

"Why is it others see things arid I don't?" she 
said. "You sit down now, S6nya. You absolute- 
ly must, tonight! Do it for me Today I feel 

so frightened!" 

S6nya sat down before the glasses, got the 
right position, and began looking. 



BOOK SEVEN 



301 



"Now, Miss S6nya is sure to see something," 
whispered Dunydsha; "while you do nothing 
but laugh." 

S6nya heard this and Natasha's whisper: 

"I know she will. She saw something last 
year." 

For about three minutes all were silent. 

"Of course she will!" whispered Natasha, 
but did not finish . . . suddenly S6nya pushed 
away the glass she was holding and covered her 
eyes with her hand. 

"Oh, Natdsha!" she cried. 

"Did you see? Did you? What was it?" ex- 
claimed Natdsha, holding up the looking glass. 

S6nya had not seen anything, she was just 
wanting to blink and to get up when she heard 
Natdsha say, "Of course she will!" She did not 
wish to disappoint cither Dunyashaor Natasha, 
but it was hard to sit still. She did not herself 
know how or why the exclamation escaped her 
when she covered her eyes. 

"You saw him?" urged Natasha, seizing her 
hand. 

"Yes. Wait a bit ... I ... saw him," S6nya 
could not help saying, not yet knowing whom 
Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince An- 
drew. 

"But why shouldn't I say I saw something? 
Others do see! Besides who can tell whether I 
saw anything or not?" flashed through S6nya's 
mind. 

"Yes, I saw him," she said. 

"How? Standing or lying?" 

"No, I saw ... At first there was nothing, 
then I saw him lying down." 

"Andrew lying? Is he ill?" asked Natdsha,her 
frightened eyes fixed on her friend. 

"No, on the contrary, on the contrary! His 
face was cheerful, and he turned to me." And 
when saying this she herself fancied she had 
really seen what she described. 

"Well, and then, S6nya? . . ." 

"After that, I could not make out what there 
was; something blue and red " 

"S6nyal When will he come back? When 
shall I see him! O, God, how afraid I am for 
him and for myself and about everything! . . ." 
Natisha began, and without replying to S6nya's 
words of comfort she got into bed, and long 
after her candle was out lay open-eyed and mo- 
tionless, gazing at the moonlight through the 
frosty windowpanes. 

CHAPTER XIII 

SOON AFTER THE CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS Nicholas 

told his mother of his love for S6nya and of his 



firm resolve to marry her. The countess, who 
had long noticed what was going on between 
them and was expecting this declaration, lis- 
tened to him in silence and then told her son 
that he might marry whom he pleased, but 
that neither she nor his father would give their 
blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, for the 
first time, felt that his mother was displeased 
with him and that, despite her love for him, 
she would not give way. Coldly, without look- 
ing at her son, she sent for her husband and, 
when he came, tried briefly and coldly to in- 
form him of the facts, in her son's presence, but 
unable to restrain herself she burst into tears of 
vexation and left the room. The old count be- 
gan irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg 
him to abandon his purpose. Nicholas replied 
that he could not go back on his word, and his 
father, sighing and evidently disconcerted, very 
soon became silent and went in to the countess. 
In all his encounters with his son, the count 
was always conscious of his own guilt toward 
him for having wasted the family fortune, and 
so he could not be angry with him for refus- 
ing to marry an heiress and choosing the dower- 
less S6nya. On this occasion, he was only more 
vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs 
had not been in disorder, no better wife for 
Nicholas than S6nya could have been wished 
for, and that no one but himself with his Mi- 
tenka and his uncomfortable habits was to 
blame for the condition of the family finances. 

The father and mother did not speak of the 
matter to their son again, but a few days later 
the countess sent for S6nya and, with a cruelty 
neither of them expected, reproached her niece 
for trying to catch Nicholas and for ingrati- 
tude. Sonya listened silently with downcast eyes 
to the countess' cruel words, without under- 
standing what was required of her. She was 
ready to sacrifice everything for her benefac- 
tors. Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea; 
but in this case she could not see what she 
ought to sacrifice, or for whom. She could not 
help loving the countess and the whole Rost6v 
family, but neither could she help loving Nich- 
olas and knowing that his happiness depended 
on that love. She was silent and sad and did 
not reply. Nicholas felt the situation to be in- 
tolerable and went to have an explanation with 
his mother. He first implored her to forgive 
him and S6nya and consent to their marriage, 
then he threatened that if she molested S6nya 
he would at once marry her secretly. 

The countess, with a coldness her son had 
never seen in her before, replied that he was 



WAR AND PEACE 



of age, that Prince Andrew was marrying with- 
out his father's consent, and he could do the 
same, but that she would never receive that 
intriguer as her daughter. 

Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, 
raising his voice, told his mother he had never 
expected her to try to force him to sell his feel- 
ings, but if that were so, he would say for the 
last time . . . But he had no time to utter the de- 
cisive word which the expression of his face 
caused his mother to await with terror, and 
which would perhaps have forever remained a 
cruel memory to them both. He had not time 
to say it, for Natdsha, with a pale and set face, 
entered the room from the door at which she 
had been listening. 

"Nicholas, you are talking nonsense! Be qui- 
et, be quiet, be quiet, I tell you! . . ." she almost 
screamed, so as to drown his voice. 

"Mamma darling, it's not at all so ... my 
poor, sweet darling," she said to her mother, 
who conscious that they had been on the brink 
of a rupture gazed at her son with terror, but 
in the obstinacy and excitement of the conflict 
could not and would not give way. 

"Nicholas, I'll explain to you. Go away! Lis- 
ten, Mamma darling," said Natdsha. 

Her words were incoherent, but they attained 
the purpose at which she was aiming. 

The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face 
on her daughter's breast, while Nicholas rose, 
clutching his head, and left the room. 

Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation, 
and so far succeeded that Nicholas received a 
promise from his mother that Sonya should not 
be troubled, while he on his side promised not 
to undertake anything without his parents' 
knowledge. 

Firmly resolved, after putt ing his affairs in or- 
der in the regiment, to retire from the army and 
return and marry S6nya, Nicholas, serious, sor- 
rowful, and at variance with his parents, but, 
as it seemed to him, passionately in love, left at 
the beginning of January to rejoin his regi- 
ment. 

After Nicholas had gone things in the Ros- 



t6v household were more depressing than ever, 
and the countess fell ill from mental agitation. 

S6nya was unhappy at the separation from 
Nicholas and still more so on account of the 
hostile tone the countess could not help adopt- 
ing toward her. The count was more perturbed 
than ever by the condition of his affairs, which 
called for some decisive action. Their town 
house and estate near Moscow had inevitably 
to be sold, and for this they had to go to Mos- 
cow. But the countess' health obliged them to 
delay their departure from day to day. 

Natasha, who had borne the first period of 
separation from her betrothed lightly and even 
cheerfully, now grew more agitated and impa- 
tient every day. The thought that her best days, 
which she would have employed in loving him, 
were being vainly wasted, with no advantage to 
anyone, tormented her incessantly. His letters 
for the most part irritated her. It hurt her to 
think that while she lived only in the thought 
of him, he was living a real life, seeing new 
places and new people that interested him. 
The more interesting his letters were the more 
vexed she felt. Her letters to him, far from giv- 
ing her any comfort, seemed to her a wearisome 
and artificial obligation. She could not write, 
because she could not conceive the possibility 
of expressing sincerely in a letter even a thou- 
sandth part of what she expressed by voice, 
smile, and glance. She wrote to him formal, 
monotonous, and dry letters, to which she at- 
tached no importance herself, and in the rough 
copies of which the countess corrected her mis- 
takes in spelling. 

There was still no improvement in the count- 
ess' health, but it was impossible to defer the 
journey to Moscowany longer. Natasha's trous- 
seau had to be ordered and the house sold. 
Moreover, Prince Andrew was expected in 
Moscow, where old Pri nee Bolk6nski was spend- 
ing the winter, and Natdsha felt sure he had al- 
ready arrived. 

So the countess remained in the country, and 
the count, taking S6nya and Natdsha with him, 
went to Moscow at the end of January. 



Book Eight: 1811-12 



CHAPTER I 

AFTER PRINCE ANDREW'S engagement to Na- 
tasha, Pierre without any apparent cause sud- 
denly felt it impossible to go on living as be- 
fore. Firmly convinced as he was of the truths 
revealed to him by his benefactor, and happy 
as he had been in perfecting his inner man, to 
which he had devoted himself with such ardor 
all the zest of such a life vanished after the 
engagement of Andrew and Natasha and the 
death of Joseph Alexe'evich, the news of which 
reached him almost at the same time. Only the 
skeleton of life remained: his house, a brilliant 
wife who now enjoyed the favors of a very 
important personage, acquaintance with all 
Petersburg, and his court service with its dull 
formalities. And this life suddenly seemed to 
Pierre unexpectedly loathsome. He ceased keep- 
ing a diary, avoided the company of the Broth- 
ers, began going to the Club again, drank a 
great deal, and came once more in touch with 
the bachelor sets, leading such a life that the 
Countess Hdlene thought it necessary to speak 
severely to him about it. Pierre felt that she was 
right, and to avoid compromising her went 
away to Moscow. 

In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge 
house in which the faded and fading princesses 
still lived, with its enormous retinue; as soon 
as, driving through the town, he saw the Iberi- 
an shrine with innumerable tapers burning be- 
fore the golden covers of the icons, the Kremlin 
Square with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, 
the sleigh drivers and hovels of the Sivtsev 
Vrazh6k, those old Moscovites who desired 
nothing, hurried nowhere, and were ending 
their days leisurely; when he saw those old 
Moscow ladies, the Moscow balls, and the Eng- 
lish Club, he felt himself at home in a quiet 
haven. In Moscow he felt at peace, at home, 
warm and dirty as in an old dressing gown. 

Moscow society, from the old women down 
to the children, received Pierre like a long- 
expected guest whose place was always ready 
awaiting him. For Moscow society Pierre was 



the nicest, kindest, most intellectual, merriest, 
and most magnanimous of cranks, a heedless, 
genial nobleman of the old Russian type. His 
purse was always empty because it was open to 
everyone. 

Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, 
benevolent societies, gypsy choirs, schools, sub- 
scription dinners, sprees, Freemasons, church- 
es, and books no one and nothing met with a 
refusal from him, and had it not been for two 
friends who had borrowed large sums from 
him and taken him under their protection, he 
would have given everything away. There was 
never a dinner or soiree at the Club without 
him. As soon as he sank into his place on the 
sofa after two bottles of Margaux he was sur- 
rounded, and talking, disputing, and joking 
began. When there were quarrels, his kindly 
smile and well-timed jests reconciled the antag- 
onists. The Masonic dinners were dull and 
dreary when he was not there. 

When after a bachelor supper he rose with 
his amiable and kindly smile, yielding to the 
entreaties of the festive company to drive off 
somewhere with them, shouts of delight and 
triumph arose among the young men. At balls 
he danced if a partner was needed. Young la- 
dies, married and unmarried, liked him be- 
cause without making love to any of them, he 
was equally amiable to all, especially after sup- 
per. "// est charmant; il n'a pas de sexe," * they 
said of him. 

Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen- 
in-waiting of whom there were hundreds good- 
humoredly ending their days in Moscow. 

How horrified he would have been seven 
years before, when he first arrived from abroad, 
had he been told that there was no need for 
him to seek or plan anything, that his rut had 
long been shaped, eternally predetermined, 
and that wriggle as he might, he would be what 
all in his position were. He could not have be- 
lieved itl Had he not at one time longed with 
all his heart to establish a republic in Russia; 

1 "He is charming; he has no sex." 



33 



34 



WAR AND PEACE 



then himself to be a Napoleon; then to be a 
philosopher; and then a strategist and the con- 
queror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the pos- 
sibility of, and passionately desired, the regen- 
eration of the sinful human race, and his own 
progress to the highest degree of perfection? 
Had he not established schools and hospitals 
and liberated his serfs? 

But instead of all thathere he was, the 
wealthy husband of an unfaithful wife, a re- 
tired gentleman-in-waiting, fond of eating and 
drinking and, as he unbuttoned his waistcoat, 
of abusing the government a bit, a member of 
the Moscow English Club, and a universal fa- 
vorite in Moscow society. For a long time he 
could not reconcile himself to the idea that he 
was one of those same retired Moscow gentle- 
men-in-waiting he had so despised seven years 
before. 

Sometimes he consoled himself with the 
thought that he was only living this life tem- 
porarily; but then he was shocked by the 
thought of how many, like himself, had en- 
tered that life and that Club temporarily, with 
all their teeth and hair, and had only left it 
when not a single tooth or hair remained. 

In moments of pride, when he thought of his 
position it seemed to him that he was quite 
different and distinct from those other retired 
gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly de- 
spised: they were empty, stupid, contented fel- 
lows, satisfied with their position, "while I am 
still discontented and want to do something 
for mankind. But perhaps all these comrades 
of minestruggled just like me and sought some- 
thing new, a path in life of their own, and like 
me were brought by force of circumstances, so- 
ciety, and race by that elemental force against 
which man is powerless to the condition I am 
in," said he to himself in moments of humility; 
and after living some time in Moscow he no 
longer despised, but began to grow fond of, to 
respect, and to pity his comrades in destiny, as 
he pitied himself. 

Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, 
hypochondria, and disgust with life, but the 
malady that had formerly found expression in 
such acute attacks was driven inwards and nev- 
er left him for a moment. "What for? Why? 
What is going on in the world?" he would ask 
himself in perplexity several times a day, in- 
voluntarily beginning to reflect anew on the 
meaning of the phenomena of life; but know- 
ing by experience that there were no answers 
to these questions he made haste to turn away 
from them, and took up a book, or hurried off 



to the Club or to Apoll6n Nikoldevich's, to 
exchange the gossip of the town. 

"Hlne, who has never cared for anything 
but her own body and is one of the stupidest 
women in the world," thought Pierre, "is re- 
garded by people as the acme of intelligence 
and refinement, and they pay homage to her. 
Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as 
long as he was great, but now that he has be- 
come a wretched comedian the Emperor Fran- 
cis wants to offer him his daughter in an illegal 
marriage. The Spaniards, thro ugh the Catholic 
clergy, offer praise to God for their victory over 
the French on the fourteenth of June, and the 
French, also through the Catholic clergy, offer 
praise because on that same fourteenth of 
June they defeated the Spaniards. My brother 
Masons swear by the blood that they are ready 
to sacrifice everything for their neighbor, but 
they do not give a ruble each to the collections 
for the poor, and they intrigue, the Astraea 
Lodge against the Manna Seekers, and fuss 
about an authentic Scotch carpet and a charter 
that nobody needs, and the meaning of which 
the very man who wrote it does not understand. 
We all profess the Christian law of forgiveness 
of injuries and love of our neighbors, the law 
in honor of which we have built in Moscow 
forty times forty churches but yesterday a de- 
serter was knouted to death and a minister of 
that same law of love and forgiveness, a priest, 
gave the soldier a cross to kiss before his exe- 
cution." So thought Pierre, and the whole of 
this general deception which everyone accepts, 
accustomed as he was to it, astonished him each 
time as if it were something new. "I under- 
stand the deception and confusion," he 
thought, "but how am I to tell them all that I 
see? I have tried, and have always found that 
they too in the depths of their souls under- 
stand it as I do, and only try not to see it. So 
it appears that it must be so! But Iwhat is to 
become of me?" thought he. He had the unfor- 
tunate capacity many men, especially Russians, 
have of seeing and believing in the possibility 
of goodness and truth, but of seeing the evil 
and falsehood of life too clearly to be able to 
take a serious part in it. Every sphere of work 
was connected, in his eyes, with evil and decep- 
tion. Whatever he tried to be, whatever he en- 
gaged in, the evil and falsehood of it repulsed 
him and blocked every path of activity. Yet he 
had to live and to find occupation. It was too 
dreadful to be under the burden of these in- 
soluble problems, so he abandoned himself to 
any distraction in order to forget them. He 



BOOK EIGHT 



35 



frequented every kind of society, drank much, 
bought pictures, engaged in building, and 
above allread. 

He read, and read everything that came to 
hand. On coming home, while his valets were 
still taking off his things, he picked up a book 
and began to read. From reading he passed to 
sleeping, from sleeping to gossip in drawing 
rooms of the Club, from gossip to carousals and 
women; from carousals back to gossip, reading, 
and wine. Drinking became more and more a 
physical and also a moral necessity. Though 
the doctors warned him that with his corpu- 
lence wine was dangerous for him, he drank a 
great deal. He was only quite at ease when 
having poured several glasses of wine mechan- 
ically into his large mouth he felt a pleasant 
warmth in his body, an amiability toward all 
his fellows, and a readiness to respond super- 
ficially to every idea without probing it deep- 
ly. Only after emptying a bottle or two did he 
feel dimly that the terribly tangled skein of 
life which previously had terrified him was not 
as dreadful as he had thought. He was always 
conscious of some aspect of that skein, as with 
a buz/ing in his head after dinner or supper he 
chatted or listened to conversation or read. But 
under the influence of wine he said to himself: 
"It doesn't matter. I'll get it unraveled. I have 
a solution ready, but have no time now I'll 
think it all out later onl" But the later on 
never came. 

In the morning, on an empty stomach, all 
the old questions appeared as insoluble and 
terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily picked up 
a book, and if anyone came to see him he was 
glad. 

Sometimes he remembered how he had heard 
that soldiers in war when entrenched under 
the enemy's fire, if they have nothing to do, try 
hard to find some occupation the more easily 
to bear the danger. To Pierre all men seemed 
like those soldiers, seeking refuge from life: 
some in ambition, some in cards, some in fram- 
ing laws, some in women, some in toys, some 
in horses, some in politics, some in sport, some 
in wine, and some in governmental affairs. 
"Nothing is trivial, and nothing is important, 
it's all the same only to save oneself from it as 
best one can," thought Pierre. "Only not to see 
it, that dreadful it!" 

CHAPTER II 

AT THE BEGINNING OF WINTER Prince Nicholas 
Bolk6nski and his daughter moved to Moscow. 
At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alex- 



ander's regime had weakened and a patriotic 
and anti-French tendency prevailed there, and 
this, togetherwith his past and his intellect and 
his originality, at once made Prince Nicholas 
Bolkcmski an object of particular respect to 
the Moscovites and the center of the Moscow 
opposition to the government. 

The prince had aged very much that year. 
He showed marked signs of senility by a tend- 
ency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite re- 
cent events, remembrance of remote ones, and 
the childish vanity with which he accepted the 
role of head of the Moscow opposition. In 
spite of this the old man inspired in all his 
visitors alike a feeling of respectful veneration 
especially of an evening when he came in to 
tea in his old-fashioned coat and powdered 
wig and, aroused by anyone, told his abrupt 
stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt 
and scathing criticisms of the present. For them 
all, that old-fashioned house with its gigantic 
mirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powdered 
footmen, and the stern shrewd old man (him- 
self a relic of the past century) with his gentle 
daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who 
were reverently devoted to him presented a 
majestic and agreeable spectacle. But the visi- 
tors did not reflect that besides the couple of 
hours during which they saw their host, there 
were also twenty-two hours in the day during 
which the private and intimate lifeof the house 
continued. 

Latterly that private life had become very 
trying for Princess Mary. There in Moscow she 
was deprived of her greatest pleasures talks 
with the pilgrims and the solitude which re- 
freshed her at Bald Hills and she had none of 
the advantages and pleasures of city life. She 
did not go out into society; everyone knew 
that her father would not let her go anywhere 
without him, and his failing health prevented 
his going out himself, so that she was not in- 
vited to dinners and evening parties. She had 
quite abandoned the hope of getting married. 
She saw the coldness and malevolence with 
which the old prince received and dismissed 
the young men, possible suitors, who some- 
times appeared at their house. She had no 
friends: during this visit to Moscow she had 
been disappointed in the two who had been 
nearest to her. Mademoiselle Bourienne, with 
whom she had never been able to be quite 
frank, had now become unpleasant to her, and 
for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her. 
Julie, with whom she had corresponded for 
the last five years, was in Moscow, but proved 



306 WAR AND PEACE 

to be quite alien to her when they met. Just 
then Julie, who by the death of her brothers 
had become one of the richest heiresses in Mos- 
cow, was in the full whirl of society pleasures. 
She was surrounded by young men who, she 
fancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate 
her worth. Julie was at that stage in the life of 
a society woman when she feels that her last 
chance of marrying has come and that her fate 
must be decided now or never. On Thursdays 
Princess Mary remembered with a mournful 
smile that she now had no one to write to, since 
Julie whose presence gave her no pleasure- 
was here and they met every week. Like the old 
emigrd who declined to marry the lady with 
whom he had spent his evenings for years, she 
regretted Julie's presence and having no one to 
write to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one 
to talk to, no one to whom to confide her sor- 
row, and much sorrow fell to her lot just then. 
The time for Prince Andrew's return and mar- 
riage was approaching, but his request to her 
to prepare his father for it had not been car- 
ried out; in fact, it seemed as if matters were 
quite hopeless, for at every mention of the 
young Countess Rost6va the old prince (who 
apart from that was usually in a bad temper) 
lost control of himself. Another lately added 
sorrow arose from the lessons she gave her six- 
year-old nephew. To her consternation she 
detected in herself in relation to little Nich- 
olas some symptoms of her father's irritability. 
However often she told herself that she must 
not get irritable when teaching her nephew, 
almost every time that, pointer in hand, she 
sat down to show him the French alphabet, 
she so longed to pour her own knowledge 
quickly and easily into the child who was al- 
ready afraid that Auntie might at any moment 
get angry that at his slightest inattention she 
trembled, became flustered and heated, raised 
her voice, and sometimes pulled him by the 
arm and put him in the corner. Having put 
him in the corner she would herself begin to 
cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicho- 
las, following her example, would sob, and 
without permission would leave his corner, 
come to her, pull her wet hands from her face, 
and comfort her. But what distressed the prin- 
cess most of all was her father's irritability, 
which was always directed against her and had 
of late amounted to cruelty. Had he forced her 
to prostrate herself to the ground all night, 
had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or 
water, it would never have entered her mind 
to think her position hard; but this loving des- 



potthe more cruel because he loved her and 
for that reason tormented himself and her 
knew how not merely to hurt and humiliate 
her deliberately, but to show her that she was 
always to blame for everything. Of late he had 
exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess 
Mary more than anything else; this was his 
ever-increasing intimacy with Mademoiselle 
Bourienne. The idea that at the first moment 
of receiving the news of his son's intentions 
had occurred to him in jest that if Andrew 
got married he himself would marry Bouri- 
enne had evidently pleased him, and latterly 
he had persistently, and as it seemed to Prin- 
cess Mary merely to offend her, shown special 
endearments to the companion and expressed 
his dissatisfaction with his daughter by demon- 
strations of love of Bourienne. 

One day in Moscow in Princess Mary's pres- 
ence (she thought her father did it purposely 
when she was there) the old prince kissed Made- 
moiselle Bourienne's hand and, drawing hereto 
him, embraced her affectionately. Princess Mary 
flushed and ran out of the room. A few min- 
utes later Mademoiselle Bourienne came into 
Princess Mary's room smiling and making 
cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Prin- 
cess Mary hastily wiped away her tears, went 
resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne, 
and evidently unconscious of what she 
was doing began shouting in angry haste 
at the Frenchwoman, her voice breaking: 
"It's horrible, vile, inhuman, to take advan- 
tage of the weakness . . ." She did not finish. 
"Leave my room," she exclaimed, and burst 
into sobs. 

Next day the prince did not say a word to 
his daughter, but she noticed that at dinner he 
gave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne 
should be served first. After dinner, when the 
footman handed coffee and from habit began 
with the princess, the prince suddenly grew 
furious, threw his stick at Philip, and instantly 
gave instructions to have him conscripted for 
the army. 

"He doesn't obey ... I said it twice . . . and 
he doesn't obey! She is the first person in this 
house; she's my best friend," cried the prince. 
"And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a 
fury, addressing Princess Mary for the first 
time, "to forget yourself again before her as 
you dared to do yesterday, I will show you who 
is master in this house. Go! Don't let me set 
eyes on you; beg her pardon!" 

Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bouri- 
enne's pardon, and also her father's pardon 



BOOK EIGHT 



for herself and for Philip the footman, who 
had begged for her intervention. 

At such moments something like a pride of 
sacrifice gathered in her soul. And suddenly 
that father whom she had judged would look 
for his spectacles in her presence, fumbling 
near them and not seeing them, or would for- 
get something that had just occurred, or take 
a false step with his failing legs and turn to see 
if anyone had noticed his feebleness, or, worst 
of all, at dinner when there were no visitors to 
excite him would suddenly fall asleep, letting 
his napkin drop and his shaking head sink 
over his plate. "He is old and feeble, and I 
dare to condemn him!" she thought at such 
moments, with a feeling of revulsion against 
herself. 

CHAPTER III 

IN 1811 there was living in Moscow a French 
doctor Me* tivier who had rapidly become the 
fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome, 
amiable as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Mos- 
cow said, an extraordinarily clever doctor. He 
was received in the best houses not merely as a 
doctor, but as an equal. 

Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medi- 
cine, but latterly on Mademoiselle Bourienne's 
advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and 
had grown accustomed to him. Me*tivier came 
to see the prince about twice a week. 

On December 6 St. Nicholas* Day and the 
prince's name day all Moscow came to the 
prince's front door but he gave orders to ad- 
mit no one and to invite to dinner only a small 
number, a list of whom he gave to Princess 
Mary. 

Mdtivier, who came in the morning with his 
felicitations, considered it proper in his quality 
of doctor de forcer la consigned as he told Prin- 
cess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It 
happened that on that morning of his name 
day the prince was in one of his worst moods. 
He had been going about the house all the 
morning finding fault with everyone and pre- 
tending not to understand what was said to 
him and not to be understood himself. Prin- 
cess Mary well knew this mood of quiet ab- 
sorbed querulousness, which generally culmi- 
nated in a burst of rage, and she went about all 
that morning as though facing a cocked and 
loaded gun and awaited the inevitable explo- 
sion. Until the doctor's arrival the morning 
had passed off safely. After admitting the doc- 
tor, Princess Mary sat down with a book in the 

1 To force the guard. 



drawing room near the door through which 
she could hear all that passed in the study. 

At first she heard only Me* tivier's voice, then 
her father's, then both voices began speaking 
at the same time, the door was flung open, and 
on the threshold appeared the handsome figure 
of the terrified MeHivierwith his shock of black 
hair, and the prince in his dressing gown and 
fez, his face distorted with fury and the pupils 
of his eyes rolled downwards. 

"You don't understand?" shouted the prince, 
"but I do! French spy, slave of Buonaparte, 
spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you . . ." 
and he slammed the door. 

Mdtivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to 
Mademoiselle Bourienne who at the sound of 
shouting had run in from an adjoining room. 

"The prince is not very well: bile and rush 
of blood to the head. Keep calm, I will call 
again tomorrow," said Mdtivier; and putting 
his fingers to his lips he hastened away. 

Through the study door came the sound of 
slippered feet and the cry: "Spies, traitors, 
traitors everywhere! Not a moment's peace in 
my own house!" 

After Me*tivier's departure the old prince 
called his daughter in, and the whole weight 
of his wrath fell on her. She was to blame that 
a spy had been admitted. Had he not told her, 
yes, told her to make a list, and not to admit 
anyone who was not on that list? Then why 
was that scoundrel admitted? She was the cause 
of it all. With her, he said, he could not have a 
moment's peace and could not die quietly. 

"No, ma'am! We must part, we must part! 
Understand that, understand it! I cannot en- 
dure any more," he said, and left the room. 
Then, as if afraid she might find some means 
of consolation, he returned and trying to ap- 
pear calm added: "And don't imagine I have 
said this in a moment of anger. I am calm, I 
have thought it over, and it will be carried out 
we must part; so find some place for your- 
self I . . ." But he could not restrain himself and 
with the virulence of which only one who 
loves is capable, evidently suffering himself, 
he shook his fists at her and screamed: 

"If only some fool would marry her!" Then 
he slammed the door, sent for Mademoiselle 
Bourienne, and subsided into his study. 

At two o'clock the six chosen guests assem- 
bled for dinner. 

These guests the famous Count Rostop- 
chin, Prince Lopukhfn with his nephew, Gen- 
eral Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, 
and of the younger generation Pierre and 



WAR AND PEACE 



Boris Drubetsk6y awaited the prince in the 
drawing room. 

Boris, who had come to Moscow on leave a 
few days before, had been anxious to be pre- 
sented to Prince Nicholas Bolk6nski, and had 
contrived to ingratiate himself so well that the 
old prince in his case made an exception to the 
rule of not receiving bachelors in his house. 

The prince's house did not belong to what is 
known as fashionable society, but his little cir- 
clethough not much talked about in town- 
was one it was more flattering to be received in 
than any other. Boris had realized this the 
week before when the commander in chief in 
his presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on 
St. Nicholas' Day, and Rostopchin had replied 
that he could not come: 

"On that day I always go to pay my devo- 
tions to the relics of Prince Nicholas Bolk6n- 
ski." 

"Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander in 
chief. "How is he? . . ." 

The small group that assembled before din- 
ner in the lofty old-fashioned drawing room 
with its old furniture resembled the solemn 
gathering of a court of justice. All were silent 
or talked in low tones. Prince Nicholas came 
in serious and taciturn. Princess Mary seemed 
even quieter and more diffident than usual. 
The guests were reluctant to address her, feel- 
ing that she was in no mood for their conversa- 
tion. Count Rostopchfn alone kept the con- 
versation going, now relating the latest town 
news, and now the latest political gossip. 

Lopukhin and the old general occasionally 
took part in the conversation. Prince Bolk6n- 
ski listened as a presiding judge receives a re- 
port, only now and then, silently or by a brief 
word, showing that he took heed of what was 
being reported to him. The tone of the con- 
versation was such as indicated that no one ap- 
proved of what was being done in the political 
world. Incidents were related evidently con- 
firming the opinion that everything was going 
from bad to worse, but whether telling a story 
or giving an opinion the speaker always 
stopped, or was stopped, at the point beyond 
which his criticism might touch the sovereign 
himself. 

At dinner the talk turned on the latest politi- 
cal news: Napoleon's seizure of the Duke of 
Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note, 
hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to 
all the European courts. 

"Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a 
captured vessel/ 1 said Count Rostopchin, re- 



peating a phrase he had uttered several times 
before. "One only wonders at the long-suffer- 
ing or blindness of the crowned heads. Now 
the Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte doesn't 
scruple to depose the head of the Catholic 
Churchyet all keep silent! Our sovereign 
alone has protested against the seizure of the 
Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and even . . ." 
Count Rostopchin paused, feeling that he had 
reached the limit beyond which censure was 
impossible. 

"Other territories have been offered in ex- 
change for the Duchy of Oldenburg," said 
Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes about 
as I might move my serfs from Bald Hills to 
Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estates." 

"The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfor- 
tunes with admirable strength of character and 
resignation," remarked Boris, joining in re- 
spectfully. 

He said this because on his journey from 
Petersburg he had had the honor of being pre- 
sented to the Duke. Prince Bolkonski glanced 
at the young man as if about to say something 
in reply, but changed his mind, evidently con- 
sidering him too young. 

"I have read our protests about the Olden- 
burg affair and was surprised how badly the 
Note was worded," remarked Count Rostop- 
chin in the casual tone of a man dealing with 
a subject quite familiar to him. 

Pierre looked at Rostopchfn with nai've as- 
tonishment, not understanding why he should 
be disturbed by the bad composition of the 
Note. 

"Does it matter, Count, how the Note is 
worded," he asked, "so long as its substance is 
forcible?" 

"My clear fellow, with our five hundred thou- 
sand troops it should be easy to have a good 
style," returned Count Rostopchin. 

Pierre now understood the count's dissatis- 
faction with the wording of the Note. 

"One would have thought quill drivers 
enough had sprung up," remarked the old 
prince. "There in Petersburg they are always 
writing not notes only but even new laws. My 
Andrew there has written a whole volume of 
laws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writ- 
ing!" and he laughed unnaturally. 

There was a momentary pause in the con- 
versation; the old general cleared his throat to 
draw attention. 

"Did you hear of the last event at the review 
in Petersburg? The figure cut by the new 
French ambassador," 



BOOK EIGHT 



39 



"Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said some- 
thing awkward in His Majesty's presence." 

"His Majesty drew attention to the Grena- 
dier division and to the march past," continued 
the general, "and it seems the ambassador took 
no notice and allowed himself to reply that: 
'We in France pay no attention to such trifles!' 
The Emperor did not condescend to reply. At 
the next review, they say, the Emperor did not 
once deign to address him." 

All were silent. On this fact relating to the 
Emperor personally, it was impossible to pass 
any judgment. 

"Impudent fellows!" said the prince. "You 
know Mtivier? I turned him out of my house 
this morning. He was here; they admitted him 
in spite of my request that they should let no 
one in," he went on, glancing angrily at his 
daughter. 

And he narrated his whole conversation with 
the French doctor and the reasons that con- 
vinced him that M^tivier was a spy. Though 
these reasons were very insufficient and ob- 
scure, no one made any rejoinder. 

After the roast, champagne was served. The 
guests rose to congratulate the old prince. 
Princess Mary, too, went round to him. 

He gave her a cold, angry look and offered 
her his wrinkled, clean-shaven cheek to kiss. 
The whole expression of his face told her that 
he had not forgotten the morning's talk, that 
his decision remained in force, and only the 
presence of visitors hindered his speaking of 
it to her now. 

When they went into the drawing room 
where coffee was served, the old men sat to- 
gether. 

Prince Nicholas grew more animated and 
expressed his views on the impending war. 

He said that our wars with Bonaparte would 
be disastrous so long as we sought alliances 
with the Germans and thrust ourselves into 
European affairs, into which we had been 
drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. "We ought not 
to fight either for or against Austria. Our po- 
litical interests are all in the East, and in re- 
gard to Bonaparte the only thing is to have an 
armed frontier and a firm policy, and he will 
never dare to cross the Russian frontier, as was 
the case in 1807!" 

"How can we fight the French, Prince?" said 
Count Rostopchin. "Can we arm ourselves 
against our teachers and divinities? Look at 
our youths, look at our ladiesl The French 
are our Gods: Paris is our Kingdom of 
Heaven." 



He began speaking louder, evidently to be 
heard by everyone. 

"French dresses, French ideas, French feel- 
ings! There now, you turned M^tivier out by 
the scruff of his neck because he is a French- 
man and a scoundrel, but our ladies crawl aft- 
er him on their knees. I went to a party last 
night, and there out of five ladies three were 
Roman Catholics and had the Pope's indul- 
gence for doing woolwork on Sundays. And 
they themselves sit there nearly naked, like the 
signboards at our Public Baths if I may say so. 
Ah, when one looks at our young people, Prince, 
one would like to take Peter the Great's old 
cudgel out of the museum and belabor them in 
the Russian way till all the nonsense jumps 
out of them." 

All were silent. The old prince looked at Ros- 
topchfn with a smile and wagged his head ap- 
provingly. 

"Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!" 
said Rostopchfn, getting up with characteristic 
briskness and holding out his hand to the 
prince. 

"Good-by, my dear fellow His words are 

music, I never tire of hearing him!" said the 
old prince, keeping hold of the hand and of- 
fering his cheek to be kissed. 

Following Rostopchin's example the others 
also rose. 

CHAPTER IV 

PRINCESS MARY, as she sat listening to the old 
men's talk and faultfinding, understood noth- 
ing of what she heard; she only wondered 
whether the guests had all observed her fa- 
ther's hostile attitude toward her. She did not 
even notice the special attentions and amiabil- 
ities shown her during dinner by Boris Drubet- 
sk6y, who was visiting them for the third time 
already. 

Princess Mary turned with an absent-minded 
questioning look to Pierre, who hat in hand 
and with a smile on his face was the last of the 
guests to approach her after the old prince had 
gone out and they were left alone in the draw- 
ing room. 

"May I stay a little longer?" he said, letting 
his stout body sink into an armchair beside her. 

"Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed noth- 
ing?" her look asked. 

Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood. 
He looked straight before him and smiled 
quietly. 

"Have you known that young man long, 
Princess?" he asked 



310 

"Who?" 

"Drubetsk6y." 

"No, not long. . . ." 

"Do you like him?" 

"Yes, he is an agreeable young man. . . . Why 
do you ask me that?" said Princess Mary, still 
thinking of that morning's conversation with 
her father. 

"Because I have noticed that when a young 
man comes on leave from Petersburg to Mos- 
cow it is usually with the object of marrying 
an heiress." 

"You have observed that?" said Princess 
Mary. 

"Yes," returned Pierre with a smile, "and 
this young man now manages matters so that 
where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too. 
I can read him like a book. At present he is 
hesitating whom to lay siege to you or Made- 
moiselle Julie Kardgina. He is very attentive 
to her." 

"He visits them?" 

"Yes, very often. And do you know the new 
way of courting?" said Pierre with an amused 
smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good- 
humored raillery for which he so often re- 
proached himself in his diary. 

"No," replied Princess Mary. 

"To please Moscow girls nowadays one has 
to be melancholy. He is very melancholy with 
Mademoiselle Karigina," said Pierre. 

"Really?" asked Princess Mary, looking into 
Pierre's kindly face and still thinking of her 
own sorrow. "It would be a relief," thought 
she, "if I ventured to confide what I am feeling 
to someone. I should like to tell everything to 
Pierre. He is kind and generous. It would be a 
relief. He would give me advice." 

"Would you marry him?" 

"Oh, my God, Count, there are moments 
when I would marry anybodyl" she cried sud- 
denly to her own surprise and with tears in her 
voice. "Ah, how bitter it is to love someone 
near to you and to feel that . . ." she went on 
in a trembling voice, "that you can do nothing 
for him but grieve him, and to know that you 
cannot alter this. Then there is only one thing 
leftto go away, but where could I go?" 

"What is wrong? What is it, Princess?" 

But without finishing what she was saying, 
Princess Mary burst into tears. 

"I don't know what is the matter with me 
today. Don't take any notice forget what I 
have said!" 

Pierre's gaiety vanished completely. He anx- 
iously questioned the princess, asked her to 



WAR AND PEACE 

speak out fully and confide her grief to him; 



but she only repeated that she begged him to 
forget what she had said, that she did not re- 
member what she had said, and that she had 
no trouble except the one he knew ofthat 
Prince Andrew's marriage threatened to cause 
a rupture between father and son. 

"Have you any news of the Rost6vs?" she 
asked, to change the subject. "I was told they 
are coming soon. I am also expecting Andrew 
any day. I should like them to meet here." 

"And how does he now regard the matter?" 
asked Pierre, referring to the old prince. 

Princess Mary shook her head. 

"What is to be done? In a few months the 
year will be up. The thing is impossible. I on- 
ly wish I could spare my brother the first mo- 
ments. I wish they would come sooner. I hope 
to be friends with her. You have known them 
a long time," said Princess Mary. "Tell me 
honestly the whole truth: what sort of girl is 
she, and what do you think of her? The real 
truth, because you know Andrew is risking so 
much doing this against his father's will that I 
should like to know. . . ." 

An undefined instinct told Pierre that these 
explanations, and repeated requests to be told 
the whole truth, expressed ill-will on the prin- 
cess' part toward her future sister-in-law and a 
wish that he should disapprove of Andrew's 
choice; but in reply he said what he felt rather 
than what he thought. 

"I don't know how to answer your ques- 
tion," he said, blushing without knowing why. 
"I really don't know what sort of girl she is; I 
can't analyze her at all. She is enchanting, but 
what makes her so I don't know. That is all 
one can say about her." 

Princess Mary sighed, and the expression on 
her face said: "Yes, that's what I expected and 
feared." 

"Is she clever?" she asked. 

Pierre considered. 

"I think not," he said, "and yet yes. She 
does not deign to be clever. . . . Oh no, she is 
simply enchanting, and that is all." 

Princess Mary again shook her head disap- 
provingly. 

"Ah, I so long to like her! Tell her so if you 
see her before I do." 

"I hear they are expected very soon," said 
Pierre. 

Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to be- 
come intimate with her future sister-in-law as 
soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to ac- 
custom the old prince to her. 



BOOK EIGHT 



CHAPTER V 

BORIS HAD NOT SUCCEEDED in making a wealthy 
match in Petersburg, so with the same object 
in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered 
between the two richest heiresses, Julie and 
Princess Mary. Though Princess Mary despite 
her plainness seemed to him more attractive 
than Julie, he, without knowing why, felt awk- 
ward about paying court to her. When they 
had last met on the old prince's name day, she 
had answered at random all his attempts to 
talk sentimentally, evidently not listening to 
what he was saying. 

Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions 
readily, though in a manner peculiar to her- 
self. 

She was twenty-seven. After the death of her 
brothers she had become very wealthy. She was 
by now decidedly plain, but thought herself 
not merely as good-looking as before but even 
far more attractive. She was confirmed in this 
delusion by the fact that she had become a 
very wealthy heiress and also by the fact that 
the older she grew the less dangerous she be- 
came to men, and the more freely they could 
associate with her and avail themselves of her 
suppers, soirees, and the animated company 
that assembled at her house, without incurring 
any obligation. A man who would have been 
afraid ten years before of going every day to 
the house when there was a girl of seventeen 
there, for fear of compromising her and com- 
mitting himself, would now go boldly every 
day and treat her not as a marriageable girl 
but as a sexless acquaintance. 

That winter the Kardgins' house was the 
most agreeable and hospitable in Moscow. In 
addition to the formal evening and dinner 
parties, a large company, chiefly of men, gath- 
ered there every day, supping at midnight 
and staying till three in the morning. Julie 
never missed a ball, a promenade, or a play. 
Her dresses were always of the latest fashion. 
But in spite of that she seemed to be disillu- 
sioned about everything and told everyone 
that she did not believe either in friendship or 
in love, or any of the joys of life, and expected 
peace only "yonder." She adopted the tone of 
one who has suffered a great disappointment, 
like a girl who has either lost the man she loved 
or been cruelly deceived by him. Though noth- 
ing of the kind had happened to her she was 
regarded in that light, and had even herself 
come to believe that she had suffered much in 
life. This melancholy, which did not prevent 
her amusing herself, did not hinder the young 



people who came to her house from passing 
the time pleasantly. Every visitor who came to 
the house paid his tribute to the melancholy 
mood of the hostess, and then amused himself 
with society gossip, dancing, intellectual games, 
and bouts rimts? which were in vogue at the 
Kardgins'. Only a few of these young men, 
among them Boris, entered more deeply into 
Julie's melancholy, and with these she had pro- 
longed conversations in private on the vanity 
of all worldly things, and to them she showed 
her albums filled with mournful sketches, max- 
ims, and verses. 

To Boris, Julie was particularly gracious: 
she regretted his early disillusionment with 
life, offered him such consolation of friendship 
as she who had herself suffered so much could 
render, and showed him her album. Boris 
sketched two trees in the album and wrote: 
"Rustic trees, your dark branches shed gloom 
and melancholy upon me." 

On another page he drewa tomb, and wrote: 

La mort est sec our able et la mort est tranquille. 
Ah! contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile.* 

Julia said this was charming. 

"There is something so enchanting in the 
smile of melancholy," she said to Boris, repeat- 
ing word for word a passage she had copied 
from a book. "It is a ray of light in the dark- 
ness, a shade between sadness and despair, 
showing the possibility of consolation." 

In reply Boris wrote these lines: 

Aliment de poison d'une dine trop sensible, 
Toi, sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible, 
Tendre me'lancholie, ah, viens me consoler, 
Viens calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite, 
Et mile une douceur secrete 
A ces pleurs que je sens couler. 3 

For Boris, Julie played most doleful noc- 
turnes on her harp. Boris read Poor Liza aloud 
to her, and more than once interrupted the 
reading because of the emotions that choked 
him. Meeting at large gatherings Julie and 

*A game in which rhymes were given to the 
players, to which they had to fit lines making up 
a verse. TR. 
8 Death gives relief and death is peaceful. 

Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge. 
8 Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul, 
Thou, without whom happiness would for me 

be impossible, 

Tender melancholy, ah, come to console me, 
Come to calm the torments of my gloomy re- 
treat, 

And mingle a secret sweetness 
With these tears that I feel to be flowing. 



WAR AND PEACE 



Boris looked on one another as the only souls 
who understood one another in a world of in- 
different people. 

Anna Mikhdylovna, who often visited the 
Karigins, while playing cards with the mother 
made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry (she 
was to have two estates in P&lt;*nza and the Niz- 
heg6rod forests). Anna Mikhdylovna regarded 
the refined sadness that united her son to the 
wealthy Julie with emotion, and resignation 
to the Divine will. 

"You are always charming and melancholy, 
my dear Julie," she said to the daughter. "Boris 
says his soul finds repose at your house. He has 
suffered so many disappointments and is so 
sensitive," said she to the mother. "Ah, my 
dear, I can't tell you how fond I have grown of 
Julie latterly," she said to her son. "But who 
could help loving her? She is an angelic be- 
ing! Ah, Boris, Boris!" she paused. "And how 
I pity her mother," she went on; "today she 
showed me her accounts and letters from Pe*n- 
za (they have enormous estates there), and she, 
poor thing, has no one to help her, and they 
do cheat her so!" 

Boris smiled almost imperceptibly while lis- 
tening to his mother. He laughed blandly at 
her naive diplomacy but listened to what she 
had to say, and sometimes questioned her care- 
fully about the Pnza and Nizheg6rod estates. 

Julie had long been expecting a proposal 
from her melancholy adorer and was ready to 
accept it; but some secret feeling of repulsion 
for her, for her passionate desire to get mar- 
ried, for her artificiality, and a feeling of horror 
at renouncing the possibility of real love still 
restrained Boris. His leave was expiring. He 
spent every day and whole days at the Kard- 
gins', and every day on thinking the matter 
over told himself that he would propose to- 
morrow. But in Julie's presence, looking at her 
red face and chin (nearly always powdered), 
her moist eyes, and her expression of continual 
readiness to pass at once from melancholy to 
an unnatural rapture of married bliss, Boris 
could not utter the decisive words, though in 
imagination he had long regarded himself as 
the possessor of those Pe*nza and Nizheg6rod 
estates and had apportioned the use of the in- 
come from them. Julie saw Boris* indecision, 
and sometimes the thought occurred to her 
that she was repulsive to him, but her feminine 
self-deception immediately supplied her with 
consolation, and she told herself that he was 
only shy from love. Her melancholy, however, 
began to turn to irritability, and not long be- 



fore Boris' departure she formed a definite plan 
of action. Just as Boris' leave of absence was 
expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his appear- 
ance in Moscow, and of course in the Kargins' 
drawing room, and Julie, suddenly abandon- 
ing her melancholy, became cheerful and very 
attentive to Kurdgin. 

"My dear," said Anna Mikhdylovna to her 
son, "I know from a reliable source that Prince 
Vasili has sent his son to Moscow to get him 
married to Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I 
should be sorry for her. What do you think of 
it, my dear?" 

The idea of being made a fool of and of hav- 
ing thrown away that whole month of arduous 
melancholy service to Julie, and of seeing all 
the revenue from the Pe*nza estates which he 
had already mentally apportioned and put to 
proper use fall into the hands of another, and 
especially into the hands of that idiot Anatole, 
pained Boris. He drove to the Karagins' with 
the firm intention of proposing. Julie met him 
in a gay, careless manner, spoke casually of 
how she had enjoyed yesterday's ball, and asked 
when he was leaving. Though Boris had come 
intentionally to speak of his love and therefore 
meant to be tender, he began speaking irrita- 
bly of feminine inconstancy, of how easily wom- 
en can turn from sadness to joy, and how their 
moods depend solely on who happens to be 
paying court to them. Julie was offended and 
replied that it was true that a woman needs 
variety, and the same thing over and over again 
would weary anyone. 

"Then I should advise you . . ." Boris began, 
wishing to sting her; but at that instant the 
galling thought occurred to him that he might 
have to leave Moscow without having accom- 
plished his aim, and have vainly wasted his ef- 
fortswhich was a thing he never allowed to 
happen. 

He checked himself in the middle of the 
sentence, lowered his eyes to avoid seeing her 
unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and 
said: 

"I did not come here at all to quarrel with 
you. On the contrary . . ." 

He glanced at her to make sure that he might 
go on. Her irritability had suddenly quite van- 
ished, and her anxious, imploring eyes were 
fixed on him with greedy expectation. "I can 
always arrange so as not to see her often," 
thought Boris. "The affair has been begun and 
must be finished!" He blushed hotly, raised his 
eyes to hers, and said: 

"You know my feelings for you!" 



BOOK EIGHT 



There was no need to say more: Julie's face 
shone with triumph and self-satisfaction; but 
she forced Boris to say all that is said on such 
occasions that he loved her and had never 
loved any other woman more than her. She 
knew that for the P^nza estates and Nizheg6- 
rod forests she could demand this, and she re- 
ceived what she demanded. 

The affianced couple, no longer alluding to 
trees that shed gloom and melancholy upon 
them, planned the arrangements of a splendid 
house in Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared 
everything for a brilliant wedding. 

CHAPTER VI 

AT THE END OF jANUARYoldCount Rost6vwent 
to Moscow with Natasha and Sonya. The count- 
ess was still unwell and unable to travel but it 
was impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince 
Andrew was expected in Moscow any day, the 
trousseau had to be ordered and the estate near 
Moscow had to be sold, besides which the op- 
portunity of presenting his future daughter-in- 
law to old Prince Bolk6nski while he was in 
Moscow could not be missed. The Rostovs' 
Moscow house had not been heated that winter 
and, as they had come only for a short time 
and the countess was not with them, the count 
decided to stay with Marya Dmitrievna Akhro- 
simova, who had long been pressing her hospi- 
tality on them. 

Late one evening the Rostovs' four sleighs 
drove into Marya Dmitrievna's courtyard in 
the old Konyusheny street. Marya Dmitrievna 
lived alone. She had already married off her 
daughter, and her sons were all in the service. 

She held herself as erect, told everyone her 
opinion as candidly, loudly, and bluntly as ev- 
er, and her whole bearing seemed a reproach 
to others for any weakness, passion, or tempta- 
tionthe possibilityof which shedid riotadmit. 
From early in the morning, wearing a dressing 
jacket, she attended to her household affairs, 
and then she drove out: on holy days to church 
and after the service to jails and prisons on 
affairs of which she never spoke to anyone. On 
ordinary days, after dressing, she received peti- 
tioners of various classes, of whom there were 
always some. Then she had dinner, a substan- 
tial and appetizing meal at which there were 
always three or four guests; after dinner she 
played a game of boston, and at night she had 
the newspapers or a new book read to her while 
she knitted. She rarely made an exception and 
went out to pay visits, and then only to the 
most important persons in the town. 



She had not yet gone to bed when the Ros- 
t6vs arrived and the pulley of the hall door 
squeaked from the cold as it let in the Rost6vs 
and their servants. Mdrya Dmitrievna, with her 
spectacles hanging down on her nose and her 
head flung back, stood in the hall doorway 
looking with a stern, grim face at the new ar- 
rivals. One might have thought she was angry 
with the travelers and would immediately turn 
them out, had she not at the same time been 
giving careful instructions to the servants for 
the accommodation of the visitors and their be- 
longings. 

"The count's things? Bring them here/' she 
said, pointing to the portmanteaus and not 
greeting anyone. "The young ladies'? There to 
the left. Now what are you dawdling for?" she 
cried to the maids. "Get the samovar ready! . . . 
You've grown plumper and prettier," she re- 
marked, drawing Natasha (whose cheeks were 
glowing from the cold) to her by the hood. 
"Fool You are coldl Now take off your things, 
quick 1" she shouted to the count who was go- 
ing to kiss her hand. "You're half frozen, I'm 
sure! Bring some rum for teal . . . Bon jour, S6n- 
ya dear!" she added, turning to Sonya and in- 
dicating by this French greeting her slightly 
contemptuous though affectionate attitude to- 
ward her. 

When they came in to tea, having taken off 
their outdoor things and tidied themselves up 
after their journey, Marya Dmitrievna kissed 
them all in due order. 

"I'm heartily glad you have come and are 
staying with me. It was high time," she said, 
giving Natasha a significant look. "The old 
man is here and his son's expected any day. 
You'll have to make his acquaintance. But we'll 
speak of that later on," she added, glancing at 
S6nya with a look that showed she did not want 
to speak of it in her presence. "Now listen, "she 
said to the count. "What do you want tomor- 
row? Whom will you send for? Shinshin?" she 
crooked one of her fingers. "The sniveling An- 
na Mikhaylovna? That's two. She's here with 
her son. The son is getting married! Then Be- 
zukhov, eh? He is here too, with his wife. He 
ran away from her and she came galloping aft- 
er him. He dined with me on Wednesday. As 
for them" and she pointed to the girls "to- 
morrowl'll take them first to the Iberianshrine 
of the Mother of God, and then we'll drive to 
the Super-Rogue's. 1 1 suppose you'll have ev- 
erything new. Don't judge by me: sleeves 

1 A pun on Suppert-Roguet, the dressmaker's 
name. TR. 



3*4 



WAR AND PEACE 



nowadays are this sizel The other day young 
Princess Irina Vasflevna came to see me; she 
was an awful sightlooked as if she had put 
two barrels on her arms. You know not a day 

passes now without some new fashion And 

what have you to do yourself?" she asked the 
count sternly. 

"One thing has come on top of another: her 
rags to buy, and now a purchaser has turned 
up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If 
you will be so kind, I'll fix a time and go down 
to the estate just for a day, and leave my lassies 
with you." 

"All right. All right. They'll be safe with me, 
as safe as in Chancery 1 I'll take them where they 
must go, scold them a bit, and pet them a bit," 
said Mdrya Dmftrievna, touching her god- 
daughter and favorite, Natasha, on the cheek 
with her large hand. 

Next morning Mdrya Dmftrievna took the 
young ladies to the Iberian shrine of the Moth- 
er of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguct, 
who was so afraid of Mdrya Dmitrievna that 
she always let her have costumes at a loss mere- 
ly to get rid of her. Mdrya Dmitrievna ordered 
almost the whole trousseau. When they got 
home she turned every body out of the room ex- 
cept Natdsha, and then called her pet to her 
armchair. 

"Well, now we'll talk. I congratulate you on 
your betrothed. You've hooked a fine fellow! I 
am glad for your sake and I've known him 
since he was so high." She held her hand a cou- 
ple of feet from the ground. Natdsha blushed 
happily. "I like him and all his family. Now 
listen! You know that old Prince Nicholas much 
dislikes his son's marrying. The old fellow's 
crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not a 
child and can shift without him, but it's not 
nice to enter a family against a father's will. 
One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly. 
You're a clever girl and you'll know how to 
manage. Be kind, and use your wits. Then all 
will be well." 

Natdsha remained silent, from shyness Mdrya 
Dmftrievna supposed, but really because she 
disliked anyone interfering in what touched 
her love of Prince Andrew, which seemed to 
her so apart from all human affairs that no one 
could understand it. She loved and knew Prince 
Andrew, he loved her only, and was to come 
one of these days and take her. She wanted 
nothing more. 

"You see I have known him a long time and 
am also fond of Mary, your future sister-in-law. 
'Husbands' sisters bring up blisters/ but this 



one wouldn't hurt a fly. She has asked me to 
bring you two together. Tomorrow you'll go 
with your father to see her. Be very nice and 
affectionate to her: you're younger than she. 
When he comes, he'll find you already know 
his sister and father and are liked by them. Am 
I right or not? Won't that be best?" 
"Yes, it will," Natdsha answered reluctantly. 

CHAPTER VII 

NEXT DAY, by Mdrya Dmf trievna's advice, Count 
Rost6v took Natdsha to call on Prince Nicholas 
Bolk6nski. The count did not set out cheerful- 
ly on this visit, at heart he felt afraid. He well 
remembered the last interview he had had with 
the old prince at the time of the enrollment, 
when in reply to ah invitation to dinner he 
had had to listen to an angry reprimand for 
not having provided his full quota of men. Na- 
tdsha, on the other hand, having put on her 
best gown, was in the highest spirits. "They 
can't help liking me," she thought. "Everybody 
always has liked me, and I am so willing to do 
anything they wish, so ready to be fond of him 
for being his father andof her for being his 
sister that there is no reason for them not to 
like me. . . ." 

They drove up to the gloomy old house on 
the Vozdvfzhenka and entered the vestibule. 

"Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said the 
count, half in jest, half in earnest; but Natdsha 
noticed that her father was flurried on entering 
the anteroom and inquired timidly and softly 
whether the prince and princess were at home. 

When they had been announced a perturba- 
tion was noticeable among the servants. The 
footman who had gone to announce them was 
stopped by another in the large hall and they 
whispered to one another. Then a maidservant 
ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, 
mentioning the princess. At last an old, cross- 
looking footman came and announced to the 
Rost6vs that the prince was not receiving, but 
that the princess begged them to walk up. The 
first person who came to meet the visitors was 
Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the fa- 
ther and daughter with special politeness and 
showed them to the princess' room. The prin- 
cess, looking excited and nervous, her face 
flushed in patches, ran in to meet the visitors, 
treading heavily, and vainly trying to appear 
cordial and at ease. From the first glance Prin- 
cess Mary did not like Natdsha. She thought 
her too fashionably dressed, frivolously gay and 
vain. She did not at all realize that before hav- 
ing seen her future sister-in-law she was prej- 



BOOK EIGHT 



udiced against her by involuntary envy of her 
beauty, youth, and happiness, as well as by 
jealousy of her brother's love for her. Apart 
from this insuperable antipathy to her, Prin- 
cess Mary was agitated just then because on the 
Rost6vs' being announced, the old prince had 
shouted that he did not wish to see them, that 
Princess Mary might do so if she chose, but they 
were not to be admitted to him. She had decid- 
ed to receive them, but feared lest the prince 
might at any moment indulge in some freak, 
as he seemed much upset by the Rost6vs' visit. 

"There, my dear princess, I've brought you 
my songstress," said the count, bowing and 
looking round uneasily as if afraid the old 
prince might appear. "I am so glad you should 
get to know one another . . . very sorry the prince 
is still ailing," and after a few more common- 
place remarks he rose. "If you'll allow me to 
leave my Natdsha in your hands for a quarter 
of an hour, Princess, I'll drive round to see An- 
na Semenovnsft it's quite near in the Dogs' 
Square, and then I'll come back for her." 

The count had devised this diplomatic ruse 
(as he afterwards told his daughter) to give the 
future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk to 
one another freely, but another motive was to 
avoid the danger of encountering the old prince, 
of whom he was afraid. He did not mention 
this, to his daughter, but Natdsha noticed her 
father's nervousness and anxiety and felt mor- 
tified by it. She blushed for him, grew still an- 
grier at having blushed, and looked at the 
princess with a bold and defiant expression 
which said that she was not afraid of anybody. 
The princess told the count that she would be 
delighted, and only begged him to stay longer 
at Anna Semenovna's, and he departed. 

Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by 
Princess Mary who wished to have a tete-a-tdte 
with Natasha Mademoiselle Bourienne re- 
mained in the room and persistently talked 
about Moscow amusements and theaters. Na- 
tasha felt offended by the hesitation she had 
noticed in the anteroom, by her father's nerv- 
ousness, and by the unnatural manner of the 
princess who she thought was making a fa- 
vor of receiving her, and so everything dis- 
pleased her. She did not like Princess Mary, 
whom she thought very plain, affected, and dry. 
Natdsha suddenly shrank into herself and invol- 
untarily assumed an offhand air which alien- 
ated Princess Mary still more. After five minutes 
of irksome, constrained conversation, they 
heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly ap- 
proaching. Princess Mary looked frightened. 



The door opened and the old prince, in a dress- 
ing gown and a white nightcap, came in. 

"Ah, madam!" he began. "Madam, Count- 
ess ... Countess Rostova, if I am not mistaken 
... I beg you to excuse me, to excuse me ... I 
did not know, madam. God is my witness, I did 
not know you had honored us with a visit, and 
I came in such a costume only to see my daugh- 
ter. I beg you to excuse me ... God is my wit- 
ness, I didn't know" he repeated, stressing 
the word "God" so unnaturally and so unpleas- 
antly that Princess Mary stood with downcast 
eyes not daring to look either at her father or 
at Natdsha. 

Nor did the latter, having risen and curtsied, 
know what to do. Mademoiselle Bourienne 
alone smiled agreeably. 

"I beg you to excuse me, excuse me! God is 
my witness, I did not know," muttered the old 
man, and after looking Natdsha over from head 
to foot he went out. 

Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to re- 
cover herself after this apparition arid began 
speaking about the prince's indisposition. Na- 
tdsha and Princess Mary looked at one anoth- 
er in silence, and the longer they did so with- 
out saying what they wanted to say, the greater 
grew their antipathy to one another. 

When the count returned, Natdsha was im- 
politely pleased and hastened to get away: at 
that moment she hated the stiff, elderly prin- 
cess, who could place her in such an embarrass- 
ing position and had spent half an hour with 
her without once mentioning Prince Andrew. 
"I couldn't begin talking about him in the 
presence of that Frenchwoman," thought Na- 
tdsha. The same thought was meanwhile tor- 
menting Princess Mary. She knew what she 
ought to have said to Natdsha, but she had 
been unable to say it because Mademoiselle 
Bourienne was in the way, and because, with- 
out knowing why, she felt it very difficult to 
speak of the marriage. When the count was al- 
ready leaving the room, Princess Mary went up 
hurriedly to Natdsha, took her by the hand, and 
said with a deep sigh: 

"Wait, I must . . ." 

Natdsha glanced at her ironically without 
knowing why. 

"Dear Natalie," said Princess Mary, "I want 
you to know that I am glad my brother has 
found happiness. . . ." 

She paused, feeling that she was not telling 
the truth. Natdsha noticed this and guessed its 
reason. 

"I think, Princess, it is not convenient to 



WAR AND PEACE 



speak of that now," she said with external dig- 
nity and coldness, though she felt the tears 
choking her. 

"What have I said and what have I done?" 
thought she, as soon as she was out of the room. 

They waited a long time for Natasha to come 
to dinner that day. She sat in her room crying 
like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing. S6n- 
ya stood beside her, kissing her hair. 

"Natasha, what is it about?" she asked. 
"What do they matter to you? It will all pass, 
Natdsha." 

"But if you only knew how offensive it was 
... as if I ..." 

"Don't talk about it, Natasha. It wasn't your 
fault so why should you mind? Kiss me," said 
S6nya. 

Natasha raised her head and, kissing her 
friend on the lips, pressed her wet face against 
her. 

"I can't tell you, I don't know. No one's to 
blame," said Natasha "It's my fault. But it all 
hurts terribly. Oh, why doesn't he come? . . ." 

She came in to dinner with red eyes. Mrya 
Dmitrievna, who knew how the prince had re- 
ceived the Rostovs, pretended not to notice 
how upset Natasha was and jested resolutely 
and loudly at table with the count and the 
other guests. 

CHAPTER VIII 

THAT EVENING the Rost6vs went to the Opera, 
for which Mdrya Dmitrievna had taken a box. 

Natasha did not want to go, but could not re- 
fuse Marya Drni'trievna's kind offer which was 
intended expressly for her. When she came 
ready dressed into the ballroom to await her 
father, and looking in the large mirror there 
saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt 
even more sad, but it was a sweet, tender sad- 
ness. 

"O God, if he were here now I would not 
behave as I did then, but differently. I would 
not be silly and afraid of things, I would sim- 
ply embrace him, cling to him, and make him 
look at me with those searching inquiring eyes 
with which he has so often looked at me, and 
then I would make him laugh as he used to 
laugh. And his eyes how I see those eyes!" 
thought Natasha. "And what do his father and 
sister matter to me? I love him alone, him, him, 
with that face and those eyes, with his smile, 
manly and yet childlike. . . . No, I had better 
not think of him; not think of him but forget 
him, quite forget him for the present. I can't 
bear this waiting and I shall cry in a minute!" 



and she turned away from the glass, making an 
effort not to cry. "And how can S6nya love 
Nicholas so calmlyand quietlyand wait so long 
and so patiently?" thought she, looking at S6n- 
ya, who also came in quite ready, with a fan in 
her hand. "No, she's altogether different. I 
can't!" 

Natasha at that moment felt so softened and 
tender that it was not enough for her to love 
and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at 
once, to embrace the man she loved, to speak 
and hear from him words of love such as filled 
her heart. While she sat in the carriage beside 
her father, pensively watching the lights of the 
street lamps flickering on the frozen window, 
she felt still sadder and more in love, and for- 
got where she was going and with whom. Hav- 
ing fallen into the line of carriages, the Ros- 
tovs' carriage drove up to the theater, its wheels 
squeaking over the snow. Natasha and S6nya, 
holding up their dresses, jumped out quickly. 
The count got out helped by thefltaotmen, and, 
passing among men and women who were en- 
tering and the program sellers, they all three 
went along the corridor to the first row of box- 
es. Through the closed doors the music was al- 
ready audible. 

"Natasha, your hair! . . ." whispered S6nya. 

An attendant deferentially and quickly 
slipped before the ladies and opened the door 
of their box. The music sounded louder and 
through the door rows of brightly lit boxes in 
which ladies sat with bare arms and shoulders, 
and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms, glit- 
tered before their eyes. A lady entering the next 
box shot a glance of feminine envy at Natasha. 
The curtain had not yet risen and the overture 
was being played. Natasha, smoothing her 
gown, went in with S6nya and sat down, scan- 
ning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. A sen- 
sation she had not experienced for a long time 
that of hundreds of eyes looking at her bare 
arms and neck suddenly affected her both 
agreeably and disagreeably and called up a 
whole crowd of memories, desires and emo- 
tions associated with that feeling. 

The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and 
S6nya, with Count Rost6v who had not been 
seen in Moscow for a long time, attracted gen- 
eral attention. Moreover, everybody knew 
vaguely of Natasha's engagement to Prince An- 
drew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived in 
the country ever since, and all looked with cu- 
riosity at a fiancee who was making one of the 
best matches in Russia. 

Natdsha's looks, as everyone told her, had 



BOOK EIGHT 



improved in the country, and that evening 
thanks to her agitation she was particularly 
pretty. She struck those who saw her by her full- 
ness of life and beauty, combined with her in- 
difference to everything about her. Her black 
eyes looked at the crowd without seeking any- 
one, and her delicate arm, bare to above the el- 
bow, lay on the velvet edge of the box, while, 
evidently unconsciously, she opened and closed 
her hand in time to the music, crumpling her 
program. "Look, there's Al^nina," said S6nya, 
"with her mother, isn't it?" 

"Dear me, Michael Kirttovich has grown still 
stouter!" remarked the count. 

"Look at our Anna Mikhdylovna what a 
headdress she has on!" 

"The Karagins, Julieand Boris with them. 
One can see at once that they're engaged " 

"Drubetskoy has proposed?" 

"Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, 
coming into the Rostovs' box. 

Natasha looked in the direction in which her 
father's eyes were turned and saw Julie sitting 
beside her mother with a happy look on her 
face and a string of pearls round her thick red 
neckwhich Natiisha knew was covered with 
powder. Behind them, wearing a smile and 
leaning over with an ear to Julie's mouth, was 
Boris* handsome smoothly brushed head. He 
looked at the Rostrtvs from under his brows and 
said something, smiling, to his betrothed. 

"They are talking about us, about me and 
him!" thought Natasha. "And he no doubt is 
calming her jealousy of me. They needn't trou- 
ble themselves! If only they knew how little I 
am concerned about any of them." 

Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing 
a green headdress and with a happy look of res- 
ignation to the will of God on her face. Their 
box was pervaded by that atmosphere of an af- 
fianced couple which Natasha knew so well 
and liked so much. She turned away and sud- 
denly remembered all that had been so humil- 
iating in her morning's visit. 

"What right has he not to wish to receive 
me into his family? Oh, better not think of it 
not till he comes back!" she told herself, and 
began looking at the faces, some strange and 
some familiar, in the stalls. In the front, in the 
very center, leaning back against the orchestra 
rail, stood D61okhov in a Persian dress, his 
curly hair brushed up into a huge shock. He 
stood in full view of the audience, well aware 
that he was attracting everyone's attention, yet 
as much at ease as though he were in his own 
room. Around him thronged Moscow's most 



brilliant young men, whom he evidently dom- 
inated. 

The count, laughing, nudged the blushing 
Sonya and pointed to her former adorer. 

"Do you recognize him?" said he. "And where 
has he sprung from?" he asked, turning to 
Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?" 

"He did," replied Shinshin. "He was in the 
Caucasus and ran away from there. They say 
he has been acting as minister to some ruling 
prince in Persia, where he killed the Shah's 
brother. Now all the Moscow ladies are mad 
about him! It's 'D61okhov the Persian' that does 
it! We never hear a word but D61okhov is men- 
tioned. They swear by him, they offer him to 
you as they would a dish of choice sterlet. D61o- 
khov and Anatole Kurigin have turned all our 
ladies' heads." 

A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plait- 
ed hair and much exposed plump white shoul- 
ders arid neck, round which she wore a double 
string of large pearls, entered the adjoining 
box rustling her heavy silk dress and took a long 
time settling into her place. 

Natdsha involuntarily gazed at that neck, 
those shoulders, and pearls and coiffure, and 
admired the beauty of the shoulders and the 
pearls. While Natdsha was fixing her gaze on 
her for the second time the lady looked round 
and, meeting the count's eyes, nodded to him 
and smiled. She was the Countess Beziikhova, 
Pierre's wife, and the count, who knew every- 
one in society, leaned over and spoke to her. 

"Have you been here long, Countess?" he in- 
quired. "I'll call, I'll call to kiss your hand. I'm 
here on business and have brought my girls 
with me. They say Semenova acts marvelously. 
Count Pierre never used to forget us. Is he 
here?" 

"Yes, he meant to look in," answered Hlne, 
and glanced attentively at Natdsha. 

Count Rost6v resumed his seat. 

"Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Na- 
tdsha. 

"Wonderful!" answered Natdsha. "She's a 
woman one could easily fall in love with." 

Just then the last chords of the overture were 
heard and the conductor tapped with his stick. 
Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls, 
and the curtain rose. 

As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and 
stalls became silent, and all the men, old and 
young, in uniform and evening dress, and all 
the women with gems on their bare flesh, turned 
their whole attention with eager curiosity to 
the stage. Natasha too began to look at it. 



WAR AND PEACE 



CHAPTER IX 

THE FLOOR OF THE STAGE consisted of smooth 
boards, at the sides was some painted card- 
board representing trees, and at the back was 
a cloth stretched over boards. In the center of 
the stage sat some girls in red bodices and white 
skirts. One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat 
apart on a low bench, to the back of which a 
piece of green cardboard was glued. They all 
sang something. When they had finished their 
song the girl in white went up to the prompt- 
er's box and a man with tight silk trousers over 
his stout legs, and holding a plume and a dag- 
ger, went up to her and began singing, waving 
his arms about. 

First the man in the tight trousers sang alone, 
then she sang, then they both paused while the 
orchestra played and the man fingered the hand 
of the girl in white, obviously awaiting the beat 
to start singing with her. They sang together 
and everyone in the theater began clapping 
and shouting, while the man and woman on 
the stage who represented lovers began smil- 
ing, spreading out their arms, and bowing. 

After her life in the country, and in her pres- 
ent serious mood, all this seemed grotesque and 
amazing to Natdsha. She could not follow the 
opera nor even listen to the music; she saw on- 
ly the painted cardboard and the queerly 
dressed men and women who moved, spoke, 
and sang so strangely in that brilliant light. 
She knew what it was all meant to represent, 
but it was so pretentiously false and unnatural 
that she first felt ashamed for the actors and 
then amused at them. She looked at the faces of 
the audience, seeking in them the same senseof 
ridicule and perplexity she herself experienced, 
but they all seemed attentive to what was hap- 
pening on the stage, and expressed delight 
which to Natdsha seemed feigned. "I suppose 
it has to be like this!" she thought. She kept 
looking round in turn at the rows of pomaded 
heads in the stalls and then at the seminude 
women in the boxes, especially at H^lene in 
the next box, who apparently quite unclothed 
sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not taking her 
eyes off the stage. And feeling the bright light 
that flooded the whole place and the warm air 
heated by the crowd, Natdsha little by little be- 
gan to pass into a state of intoxication she had 
not experienced for a long while. She did not 
realize who and where she was, nor what was 
going on before her. As she looked and thought, 
the strangest fancies unexpectedly and discon- 
nectedly passed through her mind: the idea oc- 
curred to her of jumping onto the edge of the 



box and singing the air the actress was singing, 
then she wished to touch with her fan an old 
gentleman sitting not far from her, then to 
lean over to Hlene and tickle her. 

At a moment when all was quiet before the 
commencement of a song, a door leading to the 
stalls on the side nearest the Rost6vs' box 
creaked, and the steps of a belated arrival were 
heard. "There's Kurdgin!" whispered Shinshfn. 
Countess Bezukhova turned smiling to the new- 
comer, and Natdsha, following the direction of 
that look, saw an exceptionally handsome ad- 
jutant approaching their box with aself-assured 
yet courteous bearing. This was Anatole Kurd- 
gin whom she had seen and noticed long ago at 
the ball in Petersburg. He was now in an adju- 
tant's uniform with one epaulet and a shoulder 
knot. He moved with a restrained swagger 
which would have been ridiculous had he not 
been so good-looking and had his handsome 
face not worn such an expression of good- 
humored complacency and gaiety. Though the 
performance was proceeding, he walked delib- 
erately down the carpeted gangway, his sword 
and spurs slightly jingling and his handsome 
perfumed head held high. Having looked at 
Natdsha he approached his sister, laid his well- 
gloved hand on the edge of her box, nodded to 
her, and leaning forward asked a question, with 
a motion toward Natdsha. 

"Mais charmante!" said he, evidently refer- 
ring to Natdsha, who did not exactly hear his 
words but understood them from the move- 
ment of his lips. Then he took his place in the 
first row of the stalls and sat down beside D6- 
lokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly 
and offhand way that D61okhov whom others 
treated so fawningly. He winked at him gaily, 
smiled, and rested his foot against the orchestra 
screen. 

"How like the brother is to the sister," re- 
marked the count. "And how handsome they 
both are!" 

Shinshi'n, lowering his voice, began to tell 
the count of some intrigue of Kurdgin'sin Mos- 
cow, and Natdsha tried to overhear it just be- 
cause he had said she was "charmante." 

The first act was over. In the stalls everyone 
began moving about, going out and coming in. 

Boris came to the Rost6vs' box, received 
their congratulations very simply, and raising 
his eyebrows with an absent-minded smile con- 
veyed to Natdsha and Sonya his fiancee's invi- 
tation to her wedding, and went away. Natdsha 
with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, and 
congratulated on his approaching wedding that 



BOOK EIGHT 



same Boris with whom she had formerly been 
in love. In the state of intoxication she was 
in, everything seemed simple and natural. 

The scantily clad Hlne smiled at everyone 
in the same way, and Natasha gave Boris a sim- 
ilar smile. 

Hdne's box was filled and surrounded from 
the stalls by the most distinguished and intel- 
lectual men, who seemed to vie with one anoth- 
er in their wish to let everyone see that they 
knew her. 

During the whole of that entr'acte Kurdgin 
stood with D61okhov in front of the orchestra 
partition, looking at the Rostovs' box. Natasha 
knew he was talking about her and this afford- 
ed her pleasure. She even turned so that he 
should see her profile in what she thought was 
its most becoming aspect. Before the beginning 
of the second act Pierre appeared in the stalls. 
The Rostovs had not seen him since their ar- 
rival. His face looked sad, and he had grown 
still stouter since Natasha last saw him. He 
passed up to the front rows, not noticing any- 
one. Anatole went up to him and began speak- 
ing to him, looking at and indicating the Ros- 
tovs' box. On seeing Natasha Pierre grew ani- 
mated and, hastily passing between the rows, 
came toward their box. When he got there he 
leaned on his elbows and, smiling, talked to her 
for a long time. While conversing with Pierre, 
Natasha heard a man's voice in Countess Beziik- 
hova's box and something told her it was Kurd- 
gin. She turned and their eyes met. Almost 
smiling, he gazed straight into her eyes with 
such an enraptured caressing look that it seemed 
strange to be so near him, to look at him like 
that, to be so sure he admired her, and not to 
be acquainted with him. 

In the second act there was scenery repre- 
senting tombstones, and there was a round hole 
in the canvas to represent the moon, shades 
were raised over the footlights, and from horns 
and contrabass came deep notes while many 
people appeared from right and left wearing 
black cloaks and holding things like daggers in 
their hands. They began waving their arms. 
Then some other people ran in and began drag- 
ging away the maiden who had been in white 
and was now in light blue. They did not drag 
her away at once, but sang with her for a long 
time and then at last dragged her off, and be- 
hind the scenes something metallic was struck 
three times and everyone knelt down and sang 
a prayer. All these things were repeatedly inter- 
rupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audi- 
ence. 



319 



During this act every time Natasha looked 
toward the stalls she saw Anatole Kurdgin with 
an arm thrown across the back of his chair, star- 
ing at her. She was pleased to see that he was 
captivated by her and it did not occur to her 
that there was anything wrong in it. 

When the second act was over Countess Be- 
ziikhova rose, turned to the Rost6vs' box her 
whole bosom completely exposed beckoned 
the old count with a gloved finger, and paying 
no attention to those who had entered her box 
began talking to him with an amiable smile. 

"Do make me acquainted with your charm- 
ing daughters," said she. "The whole town is 
singing their praises and I don't even know 
them." 

Nattlsha rose and curtsied to the splendid 
countess. She was so pleased by praise from 
this brilliant beauty that she blushed with 
pleasure. 

"I want to become a Moscovite too, now," 
said Hlne. "How is it you're not ashamed to 
bury such pearls in the country?" 

Countess Beziikhova quite deserved her rep- 
utation of being a fascinating woman. She 
could say what she did not think especially 
what was flattering quite simply and natural- 

iy- 

"Dear count, you must let me look afteryour 
daughters! Though I am not staying here long 
this time nor are you I will try to amuse them. 
I have already heard much of you in Peters- 
burg and wanted to get to know you," said she 
to Natasha with her stereotyped and lovely 
smile. "I had heard about you from my page, 
Drubetskoy. Have you heard he is getting mar- 
ried? And also from my husband's friend Bol- 
k6nski, Prince Andrew Bolk6nski," she went 
on with special emphasis, implying that she 
knew of his relation to Natasha. To get better 
acquainted she asked that one of the young 
ladies should come into her box for the rest of 
the performance, and Natdsha moved over to 
it. 

The scene of the third act represented a pal- 
ace in which many candles were burning and 
pictures of knights with short beards hung on 
the walls. In the middle stood what were prob- 
ably a king and a queen. The king waved his 
right arm and, evidently nervous, sang some- 
thing badly and sat down on a crimson throne. 
The maiden who had been first in white and 
then in light blue, now wore only a smock, and 
stood beside the throne with her hair down. 
She sangsomething mournfully, addressing the 
queen, but the king waved his arm severely, 



320 



WAR AND PEACE 



and men and women with bare legs came in 
from both sides and began dancing all together. 
Then the violins played very shrilly and mer- 
rily and one of the women with thick bare legs 
and thin arms, separating from the others, went 
behind the wings, adjusted her bodice, returned 
to the middle of the stage, and began jump- 
ing and striking one foot rapidly against the 
other. In the stalls everyone clapped and shout- 
ed "bravo!" Then one of the men went into a 
corner of the stage. The cymbals and horns in 
the orchestra struck up more loudly, and this 
man with bare legs jumped very high and waved 
his feet about very rapidly. (He was Duport, 
who received sixty thousand rubles a year for 
this art.) Everybody in the stalls, boxes, and 
galleries began clapping and shouting with all 
their might, and the man stopped and began 
smiling and bowing to all sides. Then other 
men and women danced with bare legs. Then 
the king again shouted to the sound of music, 
and they all began singing. But suddenly a 
storm came on, chromatic scales and diminished 
sevenths were heard in the orchestra, everyone 
ran off, again dragging one of their number 
away, and the curtain dropped. Once more 
there was a terrible noise and clatter among the 
audience, and with rapturous faces everyone 
began shouting: "Duport I Duport! Duport!" 
Natdsha no longer thought this strange. She 
look about with pleasure, smiling joyfully. 

"Isn't Duport delightful?" Hlneasked her. 

"Oh, yes," replied Natdsha. 

CHAPTER X 

DURING THE entr'acte a whiff of cold air came 
into Hlne's box, the door opened, and Ana- 
tole entered, stooping and trying not to brush 
against anyone. 

"Let me introduce my brother to you," said 
Hlne, her eyes shifting uneasily from Na- 
tdsha to Anatole. 

Natdsha turned her pretty little head toward 
the elegant young officer and smiled at him 
over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who was as 
handsome at close quarters as at a distance, sat 
down beside her and told her he had long 
wished to have this happinessever since the 
Naryshkins' ball in fact, at which he had had 
the well-remembered pleasure of seeing her. 
Kurdgin was much more sensible and simple 
with women than among men. He talked bold- 
ly and naturally, and Natasha was strangely 
and agreeably struck by the fact that there was 
nothing formidable in this man about whom 
there was so much talk, but that on the con- 



trary his smile was most nai've, cheerful, and 
good-natured. 

Kurdgin asked her opinion of the perform- 
ance and told her how at a previous perform- 
ance Semenova had fallen down on the stage. 

"And do you know, Countess," he said, sud- 
denly addressing her as an old, familiar ac- 
quaintance, "we are getting up a costume tour- 
nament; you ought to take part in it! It will 
be great fun. We shall all meet at the Kardgins'l 
Please come! No! Really, eh?" said he. 

While saying this he never removed his smil- 
ing eyes from her face, her neck, and her bare 
arms. Natdsha knew for certain that he was en- 
raptured by her. This pleased her, yet his pres- 
ence made her feel constrained and oppressed. 
When she was not looking at him she felt 
that he was looking at her shoulders, and she 
involuntarily caught his eye so that he should 
look into hers rather than this. But looking in- 
to his eyes she was frightened, realizing that 
there was not that barrier of modesty she had 
always felt between herself and other men. She 
did not know how it was that within five min- 
utes she had come to feel herself terribly near 
to this man. When she turned away she feared 
he might seize her from behind by her bare arm 
and kiss her on the neck. They spoke of most 
ordinary things, yet she felt that they were clos- 
er to one another than she had ever been to 
any man. Natdsha kept turning to Hdene and 
to her father, as if asking what it all meant, but 
He*lene was engaged in conversation with a 
general and did not answer her look, and her 
father's eyes said nothing but what they always 
said: "Having a good time? Well, I'm glad of 
it!" 

During one of these moments of awkward 
silence when Anatole's prominent eyes were 
gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natdsha, to 
break the silence, asked him how he liked Mos- 
cow. She asked the question and blushed. She 
felt all the time that by talking to him she was 
doing something improper. Anatole smiled as 
though to encourage her. 

"At first I did not like it much, because what 
makesa townpleasantcejorcf lesjoliesjemmes? 
isn't that so? But now I like it very much in- 
deed," he said, looking at her significantly. 
"You'll come to the costume tournament, 
Countess? Do come!" and putting out his hand 
to her bouquet and dropping his voice, he add- 
ed, "You will be the prettiest there. Do come, 
dear countess, and give me this flower as a 
pledge!" 

1 Are the pretty women. 



BOOK EIGHT 



321 



Natdsha did not understand what he was 
saying any more than he did himself, but she 
felt that his incomprehensible words had an 
improper intention. She did not know what to 
say and turned away as if she had not heard his 
remark. But as soon as she had turned away she 
felt that he was there, behind, so close behind 
her. 

"How is he now? Confused? Angry? Ought 
I to put it right?" she asked herself, and she 
could not refrain from turning round. She 
looked straight into his eyes, and his nearness, 
self-assurance, and the good-natured tenderness 
of his smile vanquished her. She smiled just as 
he was doing, gazing straight into his eyes. 
And again she felt with horror that no barrier 
lay between him and her. 

The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, 
serene and gay. Natasha went back to her fa- 
ther in the other box, now quite submissive to 
the world she found herself in. All that was 
going on before her now seemed quite nat- 
ural, but on the other hand all her previous 
thoughts of her betrothed, of Princess Mary, 
or of life in the country did not once recur 
to her mind and were as if belonging to a re- 
mote past. 

In the fourth act there was some sort of dev- 
il who sang waving his arm about, till the 
boards were withdrawn from under him and he 
disappeared down below. That was the only 
part of the fourth act that Natasha saw. She 
felt agitated and tormented, and the cause of 
this was Kurdgin whom she could not help 
watching. As they were leaving the theater An- 
atole came up to them, called their carriage, 
and helped them in. As he was putting Na- 
tdsha in he pressed her arm above the elbow. 
Agitated and flushed she turned round. He was 
looking at her with glittering eyes, smiling ten- 
derly. 

Only after she had reached home was Na- 
tasha able clearly to think over what had hap- 
pened to her, and suddenly remembering 
Prince Andrew she was horrified, and at tea to 
which all had sat down after the opera, she 
gave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out 
of the room. 

"O God! I am lost!" she said to herself. "How 
could I let him?" She sat for a long time hiding 
her flushed face in her hands trying to realize 
what had happened to her, but was unable ei- 
ther to understand what had happened or what 
she felt. Everything seemed dark, obscure, and 
terrible. There in that enormous, illuminated 



theater where the bare-legged Duport, in a tin- 
sel-decorated jacket, jumped about to the music 
on wet boards, and young girls and old men, and 
the nearly naked Hdene with her proud, calm 
smile, rapturously cried "bravo!" there in the 
presence of that Hellene it had all seemed -clear 
and simple; but now, alone by herself, it was 
incomprehensible. "What is it? What was that 
terror I felt of him? What is this gnawing of 
conscience I am feeling now?" she thought. 

Only to the old countess at night in bed 
could Natasha have told all she was feeling. 
She knew that S6nya with her severe and sim- 
ple views would cither not understand it at all 
or would be horrified at such a confession. So 
Natdsha tried to solve what was torturing her 
by herself. 

"Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?"she 
asked herself, and with soothing irony replied: 
"What a fool I am to ask that! What did hap- 
pen to me? Nothing! I have clone nothing, I 
didn't lead him on at all. Nobody will know 
and I shall never see him again," she told her- 
self. "So it is plain that nothing has happened 
and there is nothing to repent of, and Andrew 
can love me still. But why 'still?' O God, why 
isn't he here?" Natdsha quieted herself for a 
moment, but again some instinct told her that 
though all this was true, and though nothing 
had happened, yet the former purity of her 
love for Prince Andrew had perished. And 
again in imagination she went over her whole 
conversation with Kuragin, and again saw the 
face, gestures, arid tender smile of that bold 
handsome man when he pressed her arm. 

CHAPTER XI 

ANATOLE KURAGIN was staying in Moscow be- 
cause his father had sent him away from Pe- 
tersburg, where he had been spending twenty 
thousand rubles a year in cash, besides running 
up debts for as much more, which his creditors 
demanded from his father. 

His father announced to him that he would 
now pay half his debts for the last time, but on- 
ly on condition that he went to Moscow as ad- 
jutant to the commander in chief a post his 
father had procured for him and would at 
last try to make a good match there. He indi- 
cated tohim Princess Mary and Julie Kardgina. 

Anatole consented and went to Moscow, 
where he put up at Pierre's house. Pierre re- 
ceived him unwillingly at first, but got used to 
him after a while, sometimes even accompanied 
him on his carousals, and gave him money un- 
der the guise of loans. 



3** 



WAR AND PEACE 



As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of 
his arrival Anatole had turned the heads of the 
Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that he 
slighted them and plainly preferred the gyp- 
sy girls and French actresses with the chief of 
whon^, Mademoiselle George, he was said to be 
on intimate relations. He had never missed a 
carousal at Danflov's or other Moscow revel- 
ers', drank whole nights through, outvying ev- 
eryone else, and was at all the balls and parties 
of the best society. There was talk of his in- 
trigues with some of the ladies, and he flirted 
with a few of them at the balls. But he did not 
run after the unmarried girls, especially the 
rich heiresses who were most of them plain. 
There was a special reason for this, as he had 
got married two years beforea fact known on- 
ly to his most intimate friends. At that time 
while with his regiment in Poland, a Polish 
landowner of small means had forced him to 
marry his daughter. Anatole had very soon 
abandoned his wife and, for a payment which 
he agreed to send to his father-in-law, had ar- 
ranged to be free to pass himself off as a bach- 
elor. 

Anatole was always con tent with his position, 
with himself, and with others. He was instinc- 
tively and thoroughly convinced that it was 
impossible for him to live otherwise than as he 
did and that he had never in his life done any- 
thing base. He was incapable of considering 
how his actions might affect others or what the 
consequences of this or that action of his might 
be. He was convinced that, as a duck is so made 
that it must live in water, so God had made 
him such that he must spend thirty thousand 
rubles a year and always occupy a prominent 
position in society. He believed this so firmly 
that others, looking at him, were persuaded of 
it too and did not refuse him either a leading 
place in society or money, which he borrowed 
from anyone and everyone and evidently 
would not repay. 

He was not a gambler, at any rate he did not 
care about winning. He was not vain. He did 
not mind what people thought of him. Still less 
could he be accused of ambition. More than 
once he had vexed his father by spoiling his 
own career, and he laughed at distinctions of 
all kinds. He was not mean, and did not refuse 
anyone who asked of him. All he cared about 
was gaiety and women, and as according to his 
ideas there was nothing dishonorable in these 
tastes, and he was incapable of considering what 
the gratification of his tastes entailed for oth- 
ers, he honestly considered himself irreproach- 



able, sincerely despised rogues and bad peo- 
ple, and with a tranquil conscience carried his 
head high. 

Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a se- 
cret feeling of innocence similar to that which 
female Magdalenes have, based on the same 
hope of forgiveness. "All will be forgiven her, 
for she loved much; and all will be forgiven 
him, for he enjoyed much." 

D61okhov, who had reappeared that year in 
Moscow after his exile and his Persian adven- 
tures, and was leading a life of luxury, gam- 
bling, and dissipation, associated with his old 
Petersburg comrade Kurdgin and made use of 
him for his own ends. 

Anatole was sincerely fond of D61okhov for 
his cleverness and audacity. D61okhov, who 
needed Anatole Kurdgin's name, position, and 
connections as a bait to draw rich young men 
into his gambling set, made use of him and 
amused himself at his expense without letting 
the other feel it. Apart from the advantage he 
derived from Anatole, the very process of 
dominating another's will was in itself a pleas- 
ure, a habit, and a necessity to D61okhov. 

Natdsha had made a strong impression on 
Kurdgin. At supper after the opera he described 
to D61okhov with the air of a connoisseur the 
attractions of her arms, shoulders, feet, and 
hair and expressed his intention of making 
love to her. Anatole had no notion and was in- 
capable of considering what might come of 
such love-making, as he never had any notion 
of the outcome of any of his actions. 

"She's first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for 
us," replied Dolokhov. 

"I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," 
said Anatole. "Eh?" 

"You'd better wait till she's married. . . ." 

"You know, I adore little girls, they lose 
their heads at once," pursued Anatole. 

"You have been caught once already by a 
'little girl'," said D61okhov who knew of Ku- 
rdgin's marriage. "Take care!" 

"Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said 
Anatole, with a good-humored laugh. 

CHAPTER XII 

THE DAY AFTER THE OPERA the Rost6vs went 
nowhere and nobody came to see them. Mrya 
Dmitrievna talked to the count about some- 
thing which they concealed from Natasha. Na- 
tdsha guessed they were talking about the old 
prince and planning something, and this dis- 
quieted and offended her. She was expecting 
Prince Andrew any moment and twice that 



BOOK EIGHT 



323 



day sent a manservant to the Vozdvizhenka to 
ascertain whether he had come. He had not ar- 
rived. She suffered more now than during her 
first days in Moscow. To her impatience and 
pining for him were now added the unpleas- 
ant recollection of her interview with Princess 
Mary and the old prince, and a fear and anxi- 
ety of which she did not understand the cause. 
She continually fancied that either he would 
never come or that something would happen 
to her before he came. She could no longer 
think of him by herself calmly and continuous- 
ly as she had done before. As soon as she be- 
gan to think of him, the recollection of the old 
prince, of Princess Mary, of the theater, and 
of Kurdgin mingled with her thoughts. The 
question again presented itself whether she 
was not guilty, whether she had not already 
broken faith with Prince Andrew, and again 
she found herself recalling to the minutest de- 
tail every word, every gesture, and every shade 
in the play of expression on the face of the 
man who had been able to arouse in her such 
an incomprehensible and terrifying feeling. 
To the family Natasha seemed livelier than 
usual, but she was far less tranquil and happy 
than before. 

On Sunday morning Mdrya Dmitrievna in- 
vited her visitors to Mass at her parish church 
-the Church of the Assumption built over the 
graves of victims of the plague. 

"I don't like those fashionable churches," 
she said, evidently priding herself on her in- 
dependence of thought. "God is the same every- 
where. We have an excellent priest, he con- 
ducts the service decently and with dignity, and 
the deacon is the same. What holiness is there 
in giving concerts in the choir? I don't like it, 
it's just self-indulgence!" 

Mdrya Dmftrievna liked Sundays and knew 
how to keep them. Her whole house was 
scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither 
she nor the servants worked, and they all wore 
holiday dress and went to church. At her table 
there were extra dishes at dinner, and the serv- 
ants had vodka and roast goose or suckling pig. 
But in nothing in the house was the holiday 
so noticeable as in Mdrya Dmitrievna's broad, 
stern face, which on that day wore an invari- 
able look of solemn festivity. 

After Mass, when they had finished their 
coffee in the dining room where the loose cov- 
ers had been removed from the furniture, a 
servant announced that the carriage was ready, 
and Mdrya Dmftrievna rose with a stern air. 
She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paid 



Calls, and announced that she was going to see 
Prince Nicholas Bolk6nski to have an explana- 
tion with him about Natdsha. 

After she had gone, a dressmaker from Ma- 
dame Suppert-Roguet waited on the Rost6vs, 
and Natdsha, very glad of this diversion, hav- 
ing shut herself into a room adjoining the 
drawing room, occupied herself trying on the 
new dresses. Just as she had put on a bodice 
without sleeves and only tacked together, and 
was turning her head to see in the glass how 
the back fitted, she heard in the drawing room 
the animated sounds of her father's voice and 
another's a woman's that made her flush. It 
was Hlne. Natdsha had not time to take off 
the bodice before the door opened and Count- 
ess Beziikhova, dressed in a purple velvet gown 
with a high collar, came into the room beam- 
ing with good-humored amiable smiles. 

"Oh, my enchantress I "she cried to the blush- 
ing Natdsha. "Charming! No, this is really be- 
yond anything, my dear count," said she to 
Count Rostov who had followed her in. "How 
can you live in Moscow and go nowhere? No, 
I won't let you off! Mademoiselle George will 
recite at my house tonight and there'll be some 
people, and if you don't bring your lovely girls 
who are prettier than Mademoiselle George 
I won't know you! My husband is away in 
Tver or I would send him to fetch you. You 
must come. You positively must! Between eight 
and nine." 

She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she 
knew and who had curtsied respectfully to her, 
and seated herself in an armchair beside the 
looking glass, draping the folds of her velvet 
dress picturesquely. She did not cease chatter- 
ing good-naturedly and gaily, continually prais- 
ing Natdsha's beauty. She looked at Natasha's 
dresses and praised them, as well as a new dress 
of her own made of "metallic gauze," which 
she had received from Paris, and advised Na- 
tdsha to have one like it. 

"But anything suits you, my charmer!" she 
remarked. 

A smile of pleasure never left Natdsha's face. 
She felt happy and as if she were blossoming 
under the praise of this dear Countess Beziik- 
hova who had formerly seemed to her so unap- 
proachable and important and was now so 
kind to her. Natdsha brightened up and felt al- 
most in love with this woman, who was so 
beautiful and so kind. Hdene for her part was 
sincerely delighted with Natdsha and wished 
to give her a good time. Anatole had asked her 
to bring him and Natdsha together, and she 



3*4 



WAR AND PEACE 



was calling on the Rost6vs for that purpose. 
The idea of throwing her brother and Natasha 
together amused her. 

Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had 
been annoyed with Natdsha for drawing Boris 
away, she did not think of that now, and in her 
own way heartily wished Natdsha well. As she 
was leaving the Rost6vs she called her protegee 
aside. 

"My brother dined with me yesterdaywe 
nearly died of laughter he ate nothing and 
kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly, 
quite madly, in love with you, my dear." 

Natdsha blushed scarlet when she heard this. 

"How she blushes, how she blushes, my pret- 
ty!" said He*lene. "You must certainly come. If 
you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a 
reason to shut yourself up. Even if you are en- 
gaged, I am sure your fiance* would wish you to 
go into society rather than be bored to death." 

"So she knows I am engaged, and she and 
her husband Pierrethat good Pierre have 
talked and laughed about this. So it's all right." 
And again, under He*lene's influence, what 
had seemed terrible now seemed simple and 
natural. "And she is such a grande dame, so 
kind, and evidently likes me so much. And why 
not enjoy myself?" thought Natdsha, gazing at 
Hellene with wide-open, wondering eyes. 

Mdrya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taci- 
turn and serious, having evidently suffered a 
defeat at the old prince's. She was still too agi- 
tated by the encounter to be able to talk of the 
affair calmly. In answer to the count's inquiries 
she replied that things were all right and that 
she would tell about it next day. On hearing of 
Countess Bezukhova's visit and the invitation 
for that evening, Mdrya Dmftrievna remarked: 

"I don't care to have anything to do with 
Bezukhova and don't advise you to; however, 
if you've promised go. It will divert your 
thoughts," she added, addressing Natdsha. 

CHAPTER XIII 

COUNT ROSTOV took the girls to Countess Be- 
zukhova's. There were a good many people 
there, but nearly all strangers to Natdsha. 
Count Rost6v was displeased to see that the 
company consisted almost entirely of men and 
women known for the freedom of their con- 
duct. Mademoiselle George was standing in a 
corner of the drawing room surrounded by 
young men. There were several Frenchmen 
present, among them Mdtivier who from the 
time He*lene reached Moscow had been an inti- 
mate in her house. The count decided not to 



sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight 
and to get away as soon as Mademoiselle 
George's performance was over. 

Anatole was at the door, evidently on the 
lookout for the Rost6vs. Immediately after 
greeting the count he went up to Natdsha and 
followed her. As soon as she saw him she was 
seized by the same feeling she had had at the 
opera gratified vanity at his admiration of her 
and fear at the absence of a moral barrier be- 
tween them. 

He"lene welcomed Natdsha delightedly and 
was loud in admiration of her beauty and her 
dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle 
George went out of the room to change her 
costume. In the drawing room people began 
arranging the chairs and taking their seats. 
Anatole moved a chair for Natdsha and was 
about to sit down beside her, but the count, 
who never lost sight of her, took the seat him- 
self. Anatole sat down behind her. 

Mademoiselle George, with her bare, fat, 
dimpled arms, and a red shawl draped over 
one shoulder, came into the space left vacant 
for her, and assumed an unnatural pose. En- 
thusiastic whispering was audible. 

Mademoiselle George looked sternly and 
gloomily at the audience and began reciting 
some French verses describing her guilty love 
for her son. In some places she raised her voice, 
in others she whispered, lifting her head tri- 
umphantly; sometimes she paused and uttered 
hoarse sounds, rolling her eyes. 

"Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard 
from every side. 

Natasha looked at the fat actress, but neither 
saw nor heard nor understood anything of 
what went on before her. She only felt herself 
again completely borne away into this strange 
senseless world so remote from her old world 
a world in which it was impossible to know 
what was good or bad, reasonable or senseless. 
Behind her sat Anatole, and conscious of his 
proximity she experienced a frightened sense 
of expectancy. 

After the first monologue the whole com- 
pany rose and surrounded Mademoiselle 
George, expressing their enthusiasm. 

"How beautiful she is!" Natdsha remarked 
to her father who had also risen and was mov- 
ing through the crowd toward the actress. 

"I don't think so when I look at youl" said 
Anatole, following Natdsha. He said this at a 
moment when she alone could hear him. "You 
are enchanting . . . from the moment I saw you 
I have never ceased . . ." 



BOOK EIGHT 



325 



"Come, come, Natdsha!" said the count, as 
he turned back for his daughter. "How beau- 
tiful she isl" Natasha without saying anything 
stepped up to her father and looked at him 
with surprised inquiring eyes. 

After giving several recitations, Mademoi- 
selle George left, and Countess Beziikhova 
asked her visitors into the ballroom. 

The count wished to go home, but He*lene 
entreated him not to spoil her improvised ball, 
and the Rostovs stayed on. Anatole asked Na- 
tasha for a valse and as they danced he pressed 
her waist and hand and told her she was be- 
witching and that he loved her. During the 
ccossaise, which she also danced with him, An- 
atole said nothing when they happened to be 
by themselves, but merely gazed at her. Nata- 
sha lifted her frightened eyes to him, but there 
was such confident tenderness in his affection- 
ate look and smile that she could not, whilst 
looking at him, say what she had to say. She 
lowered her eyes. 

"Don't say such things to me. I am betrothed 
and love another," she said rapidly. . . . She 
glanced at him. 

Anatole was not upset or pained by what 
she had said. 

"Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" 
said he. "I tell you I am madly, madly, in love 
with you! Is it my fault that you are enchant- 
ing? . . . It's our turn to begin." 

Natdsha, animated and excited, looked 
about her with wide-open frightened eyes and 
seemed merrier than usual. She understood 
hardly anything that went on that evening. 
They danced the ecossaise and the Grossvater 
Her father asked her to come home, but she 
begged to remain. Wherever she went and 
whomever she was speaking to, she felt his eyes 
upon her. Later on she recalled how she had 
asked her father to let her go to the dressing 
room to rearrange her dress, that Hlene had 
followed her and spoken laughingly of her 
brother's love, and that she again met Anatole 
in the little sitting room. Hlene had disap- 
peared leaving them alone, and Anatole had 
taken her hand and said in a tender voice: 

"I cannot come to visit you but is it possible 
that I shall never see you? I love you madly. 
Can I never . . . ?" and, blocking her path, he 
brought his face close to hers. 

His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so 
close to hers that she saw nothing but them. 

"Natalie?" he whispered inquiringly while 
she felt her hands being painfully pressed. 
"Natalie?" 



"I don't understand. I have nothing to say," 
her eyes replied. 

Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the 
same instant she felt herself released, and 
Hlne's footsteps and the rustle of her dress 
were heard in the room. Natasha looked round 
at her, and then, red and trembling, threw a 
frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and 
moved toward the door. 

"One word, just one, for God's sake!" cried 
Anatole. 

She paused. She so wanted a word from him 
that would explain to her what had happened 
and to which she could find no answer. 

"Natalie, just a word, only one!" he kept re- 
peating, evidently not knowing what to say 
and he repeated it till Hlene came up to 
them. 

He*lenc returned with Natdsha to the draw- 
ing room. The Rostovs went away without 
staying for supper. 

After reaching home Natasha did not sleep 
all night. She was tormented by the insoluble 
question whether she loved Anatole or Prince 
Andrew. She loved Prince Andrew she re- 
membered distinctly how deeply she loved him. 
But she also loved Anatole, of that there was 
no doubt. "Else how could all this have hap- 
pened?" thought she. "If, after that, I could re- 
turn his smile when saying good-by, if I was 
able to let it come to that, it means that I loved 
him from the first. It means that he is kind, 
noble, and splendid, and I could not help lov- 
ing him. What am I to do if I love him and the 
other one too?" she asked herself, unable to 
find an answer to these terrible questions. 

CHAPTER XIV 

MORNING CAME with its cares and bustle. Every- 
one got up and began to move about and talk, 
dressmakers came again. Mdrya Dmitrievna 
appeared, and they were called to breakfast. 
Natasha kept looking uneasily at everybody 
with wide-open eyes, as if wishing to intercept 
every glance directed toward her, and tried to 
appear the same as usual. 

After breakfast, which was her best time, 
Mdrya Dmitrievna sat down in her armchair 
and called Natdsha and the count to her. 

"Well, friends, I have now thought the whole 
matter over and this is my advice," she began. 
"Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince 

Bolk6nski. Well, I had a talk with him He 

took it into his head to begin shouting, but I 
am not one to be shouted down. I said what I 
had to say!" 



3*6 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Well, and he?" asked the count. 

"He? He's crazy ... he did not want to listen. 
But what's the use of talking? As it is we have 
worn the poor girl out," said M^rya Dmf triev- 
na. "My advice to you is finish your business 
and go back home to Otrddnoe . . . and wait 
there." 

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha. 

"Yes, go back," said Mrya Dmftrievna,"and 
wait there. If your betrothed comes here now 
there will be no avoiding a quarrel; but alone 
with the old man he will talk things over and 
then come on to you." 

Count Rost6v approved of this suggestion, 
appreciating its reasonableness. If the old man 
came round it would be all the better to visit 
him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on; and 
if not, the wedding, against his wishes, could 
only be arranged at Otrddnoe. 

"That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I 
went to see him and took her," said the old 
count. 

"No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to 
pay your respects. But if he won't that's his 
affair," said M^rya Dmhrievna, looking for 
something in her reticule. "Besides, the trous- 
seau is ready, so there is nothing to wait for; 
and what is not ready I'll send after you. 
Though I don't like letting you go, it is the 
best way. So go, with God's blessing!" 

Having found what she was looking for in 
the reticule she handed it to Natasha. It was a 
letter from Princess Mary. 

"She has written to you. How she torments 
herself, poor thing! She's afraid you might 
think that she does not like you." 

"But she doesn't like me," said Natasha. 

"Don't talk nonsense!" cried Mrya Dmftri- 
evna. 

"I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't 
like me," replied Natisha boldly as she took 
the letter, and her face expressed a cold and 
angry resolution that caused Mdrya Dmftri- 
evna to look at her more intently and to frown. 

"Don't answer like that, my good girl!" she 
said. "What I say is true! Write an answer!" 

Natasha did not reply and went to her own 
room to read Princess Mary's letter. 

Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair 
at the misunderstanding that had occurred be- 
tween them. Whatever her father's feelings 
might be, she begged Natasha to believe that 
she could not help loving her as the one cho- 
sen by her brother, for whose happiness she 
was ready to sacrifice everything. 

"Do not think, however," she wrote, "that 



my father is ill-disposed toward you. He is an 
invalid and an old man who must be forgiven; 
but he is good and magnanimous and will love 
her who makes his son happy." Princess Mary 
went on to ask Natasha to fix a time when she 
could see her again. 

After reading the letter Natdsha sat down at 
the writing table to answer it. "Dear Princess," 
she wrote in French quickly and mechanically, 
and then paused. What more could she write 
after all that had happened the evening be- 
fore? "Yes, yes! All that has happened, and 
now all is changed," she thought as she sat with 
the letter she had begun before her. "Must I 
break off with him? Must I really? That's aw- 
ful . . ." arid to escape from these dreadful 
thoughts she went to S6nya and began sorting 
patterns with her. 

After dinner Nat'tsha went to her room and 
again took up Princess Mary's letter. "Can it 
be that it is all over?" she thought. "Can it be 
that all this has happened so quickly and has 
destroyed all that went before?" She recalled 
her love for Prince Andrew in all its former 
strength, and at the same time felt that she 
loved Kur^gin. She vividly pictured herself as 
Prince Andrew's wife, and the scenes of happi- 
ness with him she had so often repeated in her 
imagination, and at the same time, aglow with 
excitement, recalled every detail of yesterday's 
interview with Anatole. 

"Why could that not be as well?" she some- 
times asked herself in complete bewilderment. 
"Only so could I be completely happy; but 
now I have to choose, and I can't be happy 
without either of them. Only," she thought, 
"to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or 
to hide it from him are both equally impos- 
sible. But with that one nothing is spoiled. 
But am I really to abandon forever the joy of 
Prince Andrew's love, in which I have lived so 
long?" 

"Please, Miss!" whispered a maid entering 
the room with a mysterious air. "A man told 
me to give you this" and she handed Natrisha 
a letter. 

"Only, for Christ's sake . . ." the girl went 
on, as Natasha, without thinking, mechanical- 
ly broke the seal and read a love letter from 
Anatole, of which, without taking in a word, 
she understood only that it was a letter from 
him from the man she loved. Yes, she loved 
him, or else how could that have happened 
which had happened? And how could she have 
a love letter from him in her hand? 

With trembling hands Natasha held that 



BOOK 

passionate love letter which D61okhov had 
composed for Anatole, and as she read it she 
found in it an echo of all that she herself im- 
agined she was feeling. 

"Since yesterday evening my fate has been 
sealed; to be loved by you or to die. There is 
no other way for me," the letter began. Then 
he went on to say that he knew her parents 
would not give her to him for this there were 
secret reasons he could reveal only to her but 
that if she loved him she need only say the 
word yes, and no human power could hinder 
their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would 
steal her away and carry her off to the ends of 
the earth. 

"Yes, yesl I love him!" thought Natasha, 
reading the letter for the twentieth time and 
finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each 
word of it. 

That evening Mdrya Dmftrievna was going 
to the Akhdrovs' and proposed to take the 
girls with her. Natasha, pleading a headache, 
remained at home. 

CHAPTER XV 

ON RETURNING late in the evening Sonya went 
to Natasha's room, and to her surprise found 
her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Open 
on the table beside her lay Anatole's letter. 
Sonya picked it up and read it. 

As she read she glanced at the sleeping Na- 
tdsha, trying to find in her face an explanation 
of what she was reading, but did not find it. 
Her face was calm, gentle, and happy. Clutch- 
ing her breast to keep herself from choking, 
Sonya, pale and trembling with fear and agi- 
tation, sat down in an armchair and burst into 
tears. 

"How was it I noticed nothing? How could 
it go so far? Can she have left off loving Prince 
Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin go to 
such lengths? He is a deceiver and a villain, 
that's plain! What will Nicholas, dear noble 
Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is the 
meaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural 
look the day before yesterday, yesterday, and 
today," thought S6nya. "But it can't be that 
she loves him! She probably opened the letter 
without knowing who it was from. Probably 
she is offended by it. She could not do such a 
thing!" 

S6nya wiped away her tears and went up to 
Natasha, again scanning her face. 

"Natdsha 1" she said, just audibly. 

Natdsha awoke and saw S6nya. 

"Ah, you're back?" 



EIGHT 327 

And with the decision and tenderness that 
often come at the moment of awakening, she 
embraced her friend, but noticing S6nya's 
look of embarrassment, her own face expressed 
confusion and suspicion. 

ilS6nya, you've read that letter?" she de- 
manded. 

"Yes," answered Sonya softly. 

Natasha smiled rapturously. 

"No, S6nya, I can't any longer!" she said. "I 
can't hide it from you any longer. You know, 
we love one another! S6nya, darling, he writes 
. . . S6nya . . ." 

S6nya stared open-eyed at Natdsha, unable 
to believe her ears. 

"And Bolk6nski?" she asked. 

"Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I 
am!" cried Natdsha. "You don't know what 
love is " 

"But, Natasha, can that be all over?" 

Natasha looked at Sonya with wide-open 
eyes as if she could not grasp the question. 

"Well, then, are you refusing Prince An- 
drew?" said Sonya. 

"Oh, you don't understand anything! Don't 
talk nonsense, just listen!" said Natdsha, with 
momentary vexation. 

"But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I 
don't understand. How is it you have loved a 
man for a whole year and suddenly . . . Why, 
you have only seen him three times! Natdsha, 
I don't believe you, you're joking! In three 
days to forget everything and so . . ." 

"Three days?" said Natdsha. "It seems to me 
I've loved him a hundred years. It seems to me 
that I have never loved anyone before. You 
can't understand it. ... S6nya, wait a bit, sit 
here," and Natdsha embraced and kissed her. 

"I had heard that it happens like this, and 
you must have heard it too, but it's only now 
that I feel such love. It's not the same as be- 
fore. As soon as I saw him I felt he was my mas- 
ter and I his slave, and that I could not help 
loving him. Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders 
I shall do. You don't understand that. What 
can I do? What can I do, Sonya?" cried Natd- 
sha with a happy yet frightened expression. 

"But think what you are doing," cried Son- 
ya. "I can't leave it like this. This secret cor- 
respondence . . . How could you let him go so 
far?" she went on, with a horror and disgust 
she could hardly conceal. 

"I told you that I have no will," Natdsha re- 
plied. "Why can't you understand? I love him I" 

"Then I won't let it come to that ... I shall 
telll" cried S6nya, bursting into tears. 



328 



"What do you mean? For God's sake ... If 
you tell, you are my enemy!" declared Nat- 
sha. "You want me to be miserable, you want 
us to be separated " 

When she saw Natasha's fright, S6nya shed 
tears of shame and pity for her friend. 

"But what has happened between you?" she 
asked. "What has he said to you? Why doesn't 
he come to the house?" 

Natdsha did not answer her questions. 

"For God's sake, S6nya, don't tell anyone, 
don't torture me," Natdsha entreated. "Re- 
member no one ought to interfere in such mat- 
ters! I have confided in you. . . ." 

"But why this secrecy? Why doesn't he come 
to the house?" asked S6nya. "Why doesn't he 
openly ask for your hand? You know Prince 
Andrew gave you complete freedom if it is 
really so; but I don't believe it! Natasha, have 
you considered what these secret reasons can 
be?" 

Natasha looked at S6nya with astonishment. 
Evidently this question presented itself to her 
mind for the first time and she did not know 
how to answer it. 

"I don't know what the reasons are. But 
there must be reasons!" 

S6nya sighed and shook her head incredu- 
lously. 

"If there were reasons ..." she began. 

But Natasha, guessing her doubts, inter- 
rupted her in alarm. 

"S6nya, one can't doubt him! One can't, one 
can't! Don't you understand?" she cried. 

"Does he love you?" 

"Does he love me?" Natasha repeated with a 
smile of pity at her friend's lack of comprehen- 
sion. "Why, you have read his letter and you 
have seen him." 

"But if he is dishonorable?" 

"He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" ex- 
claimed Natasha. 

"If he is an honorable man he should either 
declare his intentions or cease seeing you; and 
if you won't do this, I will. I will write to him, 
and I will tell Papal" said Sonya resolutely. 

"But I can't live without him!" cried Nata- 
sha. 

"Natdsha, I don't understand you. And what 
are you saying! Think of your father and of 
Nicholas." 

"I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone 
but him. How dare you say he is dishonorable? 
Don't you know that I love him?" screamed 
Natisha. "Go away, S6nya! I don't want to 
quarrel with you, but go, for God's sake got 



WAR AND PEACE 

You see how I am suffering!" Natasha cried 
angrily, in a voice of despair and repressed ir- 
ritation. S6nya burst into sobs and ran from 
the room. 

Natasha went to the table and without a 
moment's reflection wrote that answer to Prin- 
cess Mary which she had been unable to write 
all the morning. In this letter she said briefly 
that all their misunderstandings were at an 
end; that availing herself of the magnanimity 
of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad 
had given her her freedom, she begged Prin- 
cess Mary to forget everything and forgive her 
if she had been to blame toward her, but that 
she could not be his wife. At that moment this 
all seemed quite easy, simple, and clear to Na- 
tdsha. 



On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the 
country, but on Wednesday the count went 
with the prospective purchaser to his estate 
near Moscow. 

On the day the count left, S6nya and Natl- 
sha were invited to a big dinner party at the 
Kardgins', and Mrya Dmftrievna took them 
there. At that party Natasha again met Ana- 
tole, and S6nya noticed that she spoke to him, 
trying not to be overheard, and that all through 
dinner she was more agitated than ever. When 
they got home Natasha was the first to begin 
the explanation Sonya expected. 

"There, S6nya, you were talking all sorts of 
nonsense about him," Natasha began in a mild 
voice such as children use when they wish to be 
praised. "We have had an explanation today." 

"Well, what happened? What did he say? 
Natdsha, how glad I am you're not angry with 
me! Tell me everything the whole truth. What 
did he say?" 

Natdsha became thoughtful. 

"Oh,S6nya, if you knew him as I do! He said 
. . . He asked me what I had promised Bolk6n- 
ski. He was glad I was free to refuse him." 

S6nya sighed sorrowfully. 

"But you haven't refused Bolk6nski?" said 
she. 

"Perhaps I have. Perhaps all is over between 
me and Bolk6nski. Why do you think so badly 
of me?" 

"I don't think anything, only I don't under- 
stand this . . ." 

"Wait a bit, S6nya, you'll understand every- 
thing. You'll see what a man he is! Now don't 
think badly ot me or of him. I don't think bad- 
ly of anyone: I love and pity everybody. But 
what am I to do?" 



BOOK EIGHT 



S6nya did not succumb to the tender tone 
Natdsha used toward her. The more emotional 
and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's 
face became, the more serious and stern grew 
S6nya's. 

"Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to 
speak to you, and I haven't spoken, but now 
you yourself have begun. I don't trust him, Na- 
tdsha. Why this secrecy?" 

"Again, again!" interrupted Natasha. 

"Natdsha, I am afraid for you!" 

"Afraid of what?" 

"I am afraid you're going to your ruin," said 
S6nya resolutely, and was herself horrified at 
what she had said. 

Anger again showed in Natasha's face. 

"And I'll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as pos- 
sible! It's not your business! It won't be you, 
but I, who'll suffer. Leave rne alone, leave me 
alone! I hate you!" 

"Natasha!" moaned Sonya, aghast. 

"I hate you, I hate you! You're myenemy for- 
ever!" And Natasha ran out of the room. 

Natdsha did not speak to Sonya again and 
avoided her. With the same expression of agi- 
tated surprise and guilt she went about the 
house, taking up now one occupation, now an- 
other, and at once abandoning them. 

Hard as it was for Sonya, she watched her 
friend and did not let her out of her sight. 

The day before the count was to return, Son- 
ya noticed that Natdsha sat by the drawing- 
room window all the morning as if expecting 
something and that she made a sign to an offi- 
cer who drove past, whom Sonya took to be 
Anatolc. 

Sonya began watching her friend still more 
attentively and noticed that at dinner and all 
that evening Natdsha was in a strange and un- 
natural state. She answered questions at ran- 
dom, began sentences she did not finish, and 
laughed at everything. 

After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Na- 
tdsha's door timidly waiting to let her pass. She 
let the girl go in, and then listening at the door 
learned that another letter had beendelivered. 

Then suddenly it became clear to Sonya that 
Natdsha had some dreadful plan for that eve- 
ning. Sonya knocked at her door. Natdsha did 
not let her in. 

"She will run away with him!" thought S6n- 
ya. "She is capable of anything. There was 
something particularly pathetic and resolute 
in her face today. She cried as she said good-by 
to Uncle," Sonya remembered. "Yes, that's it, 
she means to elope with him, but what am I to 



329 



do?" thought she, recalling all the signs that 
clearly indicated that Natdsha had some ter- 
rible intention. "The count is away. What am 
I to do? Write to Kurdgin demanding an ex- 
planation? But what is there to oblige him to 
reply? Write to Pierre, as Prince Andrew asked 
me to in case of some misfortune? . . . But per- 
haps she really has already refused Bolk6nski 
she sent a letter to Princess Mary yesterday. 

And Uncle is away " To tell Mdrya Dmftri- 

evna who had such faith in Natdsha seemed to 
S6nya terrible. "Well, anyway," thought Son- 
ya as she stood in the dark passage, "now or 
never I must prove that I remember the fam- 
ily's goodness to me and that I love Nicholas. 
Yes! If I don't sleep for three nights I'll not 
leave this passage and will hold her back by 
force and not let the family be disgraced," 
thought she. 

CHAPTER XVI 

ANATOLE had lately moved to D61okhov's. The 
plan for Natalie Rostova's abduction had been 
arranged and the preparations made by D61o- 
khov a few days before, and on the day that 
Sonya, after listening at Natdsha's door, re- 
solved to safeguard her, it was to have been put 
into execution. Natdsha had promised to come 
out to Kurdgin at the back porch at ten that 
evening. Kurdgin was to put her into a troyka 
he would have ready and to drive her forty 
miles to the village of Kdmenka, where an un- 
frocked priest was in readiness to perform a 
marriage ceremony over them. At Kdmenka a 
relay of horses was to wait which would take 
them to the Warsaw highroad, and from there 
they would hasten abroad with post horses. 

Anatole had a passport, an order for post 
horses, ten thousand rubles he had taken from 
his sister and another ten thousand borrowed 
with Dolokhov's help. 

Two witnesses for the mock marriage Khvos- 
tikov, a retired petty official whom Dolokhov 
made use of in his gambling transactions, and 
Makdrin, a retired hussar, a kindly, weak fel- 
low who had an unbounded affection for Kura- 
gin were sitting at tea in Dolokhov's front 
room. 

In his large study, the walls of which were 
hung to the ceiling with Persian rugs, bear- 
skins, and weapons, sat D61okhov in a travel- 
ing cloak and high boots, at an open desk on 
which lay an abacus and some bundles of paper 
money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, 
walked to and fro from the room where the 
witnesses were sitting, through the study to the 



33 



WAR AND PEACE 



room behind, where his French valet and oth- 
ers were packing the last of his things. D61o- 
khovwas counting themoneyand noting some- 
thing down. 

"Well," he said, "Khv6stikov must have two 
thousand." 

"Give it to him, then," said Anatole. 

"Makdrka" (their name for Makdrin) "will 
go through fire and water for you for nothing. 
So here are our accounts all settled," said 
Ddlokhov, showing him the memorandum. "Is 
that right?" 

"Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evident- 
ly not listening to D61okhov and looking 
straight before him with a smile that did not 
leave his face. 

D61okhov banged down the lid of his desk 
and turned to Anatole with an ironic smile: 

"Do you know? You'd really better drop it 
all. There's still time!" 

"Fool," retorted Anatole. "Don't talk non- 
sense I If you only knew . . . it's the devil knows 
what!" 

"No, really, give it up! "said D61okhov."I am 
speaking seriously. It's no joke, this plot you've 
hatched." 

"What, teasing agaia? Go to the devil! Eh?" 
said Anatole, making a grimace. "Really it's no 
time for your stupid jokes," and he left the 
room. 

D61okhov smiled contemptuously and con- 
descendingly when Anatole had gone out. 

"You wait a bit," he called after him. "I'm 
not joking, I'm talking sense. Come here, come 
here!" 

Anatole returned and looked at D61okhov, 
trying to give him his attention and evidently 
submitting to him involuntarily. 

"Now listen to me. I'm telling you this for the 
last time. Why should I joke about it? Did I 
hinder you? Who arranged everything for you? 
Who found the priest and got the passport? 
Who raised the money? I did it all." 

"Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am 
not grateful?" And Anatole sighed and em- 
braced D61okhov. 

"I helped you, but all the same I must tell 
you the truth; it is a dangerous business, and if 
you think about it a stupid business. Well, 
you'll carry her off all right! Will they let it 
stop at that? It will come out that you're al- 
ready married. Why, they'll have you in the 
criminal court. . . ." 

"Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculat- 
ed and again made a grimace. "Didn't I ex- 
plain to you? What?" And Anatole, with the 



partiality dull-witted people have for any con- 
clusion they have reached by their own reason- 
ing, repeated the argument he had already put 
to D61okhov a hundred times. "Didn't I ex- 
plain to you that I have come to this conclu- 
sion: if this marriage is invalid," he went on, 
crooking one finger, "then I have nothing to 
answer for; but if it is valid, no matter! Abroad 
no one will know anything about it. Isn't that 
so? And don't talk to me, don't, don't." 

"Seriously, you'd better drop it! You'll only 
get yourself into a mess!" 

"Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutch- 
ing his hair, left the room, but returned at 
once and dropped into an armchair in front of 
D61okhov with his feet tucked under him. "It's 
the very devil! What? Feel how it beats!" He 
took D61okhov's hand and put it on his heart. 
"What a foot, my dear fellow! What a glance! 
A goddess!" he added in French. "What?" 

D61okhov with a cold smile and a gleam in 
his handsome insolent eyes looked at him evi- 
dently wishing to get some more amusement 
out of him. 

"Well and when the .money's gone, what 
then?" 

"What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincere- 
ly perplexed by a thought of the future. "What 

then? . . . Then, I don't know But why talk 

nonsense!" He glanced at his watch. "It'stime!" 

Anatole went into the back room. 

"Now then I Nearly ready? You're dawdling! " 
he shouted to the servants. 

D61okhov put away the money, called a foot- 
man whom he ordered to bring something for 
them to eat and drink before the journey, and 
went into the room where Khv6stikov and 
Makrin were sitting. 

Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning 
on his elbow and smiling pensively, while his 
handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself. 

"Come and eat something. Have a drink!" 
D61okhov shouted to him from the other room. 

"I don't want to," answered Anatole contin- 
uing to smile. 

"Come! Balagd is here." 

Anatole rose and went into the dining room. 
Balagd was a famous troyka driver who had 
known D61okhov and Anatole some six years 
and had given them good service with his troy- 
kas. More than once when Anatole's regiment 
was stationed at Tver he had taken him from 
Tver in the evening, brought him to Moscow 
by daybreak, and driven him back again the 
next night. More than once he had enabled 
Dblokhov to escape when pursued. More than 



BOOK EIGHT 



33* 



once he had driven them through the town with 
gypsies and "ladykins"as he called thecocottes. 
More than once in their service he had run 
over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the 
streets of Moscow and had always been pro- 
tected from the consequences by "my gentle- 
men" as he called them. He had ruined more 
than one horse in theirservice. More than once 
they had beaten him, and more than once they 
had made him drunk on champagne and Ma- 
deira, which he loved; and he knew more than 
one thing about each of them which would 
long ago have sent an ordinary man to Siberia. 
They often called Balagd into their orgies and 
made him drink and dance at the gypsies', and 
more than one thousand rubles of their money 
had passed through his hands. In their service 
he risked his skin and his life twenty times a 
year, and in their service had lost more horses 
than the money he had from them would buy. 
But he liked them; liked that mad driving at 
twelve miles an hour, liked upsetting a driver 
or running down a pedestrian, and flying at 
full gallop through the Moscow streets. He 
liked to hear those wild, tipsy shouts behind 
him: "Get on! Get on!" when it was impossible 
to go any faster. He liked giving a painful lash 
on the neck to some peasant who, more dead 
than alive, was already hurrying out of his 
way. "Real gentlemen!" he considered them. 

Anatole and D61okhov liked Balagd too for 
his masterly driving and because he liked the 
things they liked. With others Balagd bargained, 
charging twenty-five rubles for a two hours' 
drive, and rarely drove himself, generally let- 
ting his young men do so. But with "his gentle- 
men" he always drove himself and never de- 
manded anything for his work. Only a couple 
of times a year when he knew from their val- 
ets that they had money in hand he would turn 
up of a morning quite sober and with a deep 
bow would ask them to help him. The gentle- 
men always made him sit down. 

"Do help me out, Theodore Ivdnych, sir," or 
"your excellency," he would say. "I am quite 
out of horses. Let me have what you can to go 
to the fair." 

And Anatole and D61okhov, when they had 
money, would give him a thousand or a couple 
of thousand rubles. 

Balagd was a fair-haired, short, and snub- 
nosed peasantof about twenty-seven; red-faced, 
with a particularly red thick neck, glittering 
little eyes, and a small beard. He wore a fine, 
dark-blue, silk-lined cloth coat over a sheep- 
skin. 



On entering the room now he crossed him- 
self, turning toward the front corner of the 
room, and went up to D61okhov, holding out a 
small, black hand. 

"Theodore Ivdnych I" he said, bowing. 
** "How d'you do, friend? Well, here he is!" 

"Good day, your excellency!" he said, again 
holding out his hand to Anatole who had just 
come in. 

"I say, Balagd," said Anatole, putting his 
hands on the man's shoulders, "do you care for 
me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service. . . . What 
horses have you come with? Eh?" 

"As your messenger ordered, your special 
beasts," replied Balagd. 

"Well, listen, Balaga! Drive all three to 
death but get me there in three hours. Eh?" 

"When they are dead, what shall I drive?" 
said Balagd with a wink. 

"Mind, I'll smash your face in! Don't make 
jokes! "cried Anatole, suddenly rolling his eyes. 

"Why joke?" said the driver, laughing. "As if 
I'd grudge my gentlemen anything! As fast as 
ever the horses can gallop, so fast we'll go!" 

"Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit down." 

"Yes, sit down!" said D61okhov. 

"I'll stand, Theodore Ivdnych." 

"Sit down; nonsense! Have a drink!" said 
Anatole, and filled a large glass of Madeira for 
him. 

The driver's eyes sparkled at the sight of the 
wine. After refusing it for manners' sake, he 
drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk 
handkerchief he took out of his cap. 

"And when are we to start, your excellency?" 

"Well . . ." Anatole looked at his watch. 
"We'll start at once. Mind, Balagd! You'll get 
there in time? Eh?" 

"That depends on our luck in starting, else 
why shouldn't we be there in time?" replied 
Balagd. "Didn't we get you to Tver in seven 
hours? I think you remember that, your ex- 
cellency?" 

"Do you know, one Christmas I drove from 
Tver," said Anatole, smiling at the recollection 
and turning to Makdrin who gazed rapturous- 
ly at him with wide-open eyes. "Will you be- 
lieve it, Makdrka, it took one's breath away, 
the rate we flew. We came across a train of 
loaded sleighs and drove right over two of them. 
Eh?" 

"Those were horses!" Balagd continued the 
tale. "That time I'd harnessed two young side 
horses with the bay in the shafts," he went on, 
turning to Ddlokhov. "Will you believe it, 
Theodore Ivdnych, those animals flew forty 



WAR AND PEACE 



miles? I couldn't hold them in, my hands grew 
numb in the sharp frost so that I threw down 
the reins 'Catch hold yourself, your excellen- 
cy!' says I, and I just tumbled on the bottom of 
the sleigh and sprawled there. It wasn't a case 
of urging them on, there was no holding them 
in till we reached the place. The devils took 
us there in three hours! Only the neurone died 
of it." 

CHAPTER XVII 

ANATOLE went out of the room and returned 
a few minutes later wearing a fur coat girt with 
a silver belt, and a sable cap jauntily set on one 
side and very becoming to his handsome face. 
Having looked in a mirror, and standing before 
D61okhov in the same pose he had assumed be- 
fore it, he lifted a glass of wine. 

''Well, good-by, Theodore. Thank you for 
everything and farewell!" said Anatole. "Well, 
comrades and friends . . ." he considered for a 
moment ". . . of my youth, farewell!" he said, 
turning to Makdrin and the others. 

Though they were all going with him, An- 
atole evidently wished to make something 
touching and solemn out of this address to his 
comrades. He spoke slowly in a loud voice and 
throwing out his chest slightly swayed one leg. 

"All take glasses; you too, Balagd. Well, com- 
rades and friends of my youth, we've had our 
fling and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, 
when shall we meet again? I am going abroad. 
We have had a good time now farewell, ladsl 
To our health! Hurra 'i! . . ." he cried, and emp- 
tying his glass flung it on the floor. 

"Tp your health!" said Balagd who also emp- 
tied kis glass, and wiped his mouth with his 
handkerchief. 

Makdrin embraced Anatole with tears in his 
eyes. 

"Ah, Prince, how sorry I am to part from 
you!" 

"Let's go. Let's go!" cried Anatole. 

Balagd was about to leave the room. 

"No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door; we 
have first to sit down. That's the way." 

They shut the door and all sat down. 1 

"Now, quick march, lads!" said Anatole, ris- 
ing- 
Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache 
and saber, and they all went out into the vesti- 
bule. 

"And where's the fur cloak?" asked Dolo- 

1 This is in accord with a Russian superstition 
as to what should be done when starting on a 
journey. TR. 



khov. "Hey, Igndtkal Go to Matrena Matr^vna 
and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard 
what elopements are like," continued D61okhov 
with a wink. "Why, she'll rush out more dead 
than alive just in the things she is wearing; if 
you delay at all there'll be tears and 'Papa' and 
'Mamma,' and she's frozen in a minute and 
must go back but you wrap the fur cloak 
round her first thing and carry her to the sleigh." 

The valet brought a woman's fox-lined cloak. 

"Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, 
the sable!" he shouted so that his voice rang 
far through the rooms. 

A handsome, slim, and pale-faced gypsy girl 
with glittering black eyes and curly blue-black 
hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with a sable 
mantle on her arm. 

"Here, I don't grudge it take it!" she said, 
evidently afraid of her master and yet regret- 
ful of her cloak. 

Dolokhov, without answering, took the cloak, 
threw it over Matrena, and wrapped her up in 
it. 

"That's the way," said D61okhov, "and then 
so!" arid he turned the collar up round her 
head, leavingonlya littleof the face uncovered. 
"And then so, do you see?" and he pushed An- 
atole's head forward to meet the gap left by 
the collar, through which Matrena's brilliant 
smile was seen. 

"Well, good-by, Matrena," said Anatole, 
kissing her. "Ah, my revels here are over. Re- 
member me to Stcshka. There, good-by! Good- 
by, Matrena, wish me luck!" 

"Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!" 
said Matrena in her gypsy accent. 

Two troykas were standing before the porch 
and two young drivers were holding the horses. 
Balagd took his seat in the front one and hold- 
ing his elbows high arranged the reins deliber- 
ately. Anatole and Dolokhov got in with him. 
Makdrin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated them- 
selves in the other sleigh. 

"Well, are you ready?" asked Balagd. 

"Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his 
hands, and the troyka tore down the Nikftski 
Boulevard. 

"Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi! . . . Tproo! 
. . ." The shouting of Balagd and of the sturdy 
young fellow seated on the box was all that 
could be heard. On the Arbdt Square the troy- 
ka caught against a carnage; something cracked, 
shouts were heard, and the troyka flew along 
the Arbdt Street. 

After taking a turn along the Podnovinski 
Boulevard, Balagd began to rein in, and turn- 



ing back drew up at the crossing of the old 
Konyusheny Street. 

The young fellow on the box jumped down 
to hold the horses and Anatole and D61okhov 
went along the pavement. When they reached 
the gate D61okhov whistled. The whistle was 
answered, and a maidservant ran out. 

"Come into the courtyard or you'll be seen; 
she'll come out directly," said she. 

D61okhov stayed by the gate. Anatole fol- 
lowed the maid into the courtyard, turned the 
corner, and ran up into the porch. 

He was met by Gabriel, Mdrya Dmitrievna's 
gigantic footman. 

"Come to the mistress, please," said the foot- 
man in his deep bass, intercepting any retreat. 

"To what mistress? Who are you?" asked An- 
atole in a breathless whisper. 

"Kindly step in, my orders are to bring you 
in." 

"Kurginl Come backl" shouted D61okhov. 
"Betrayed! Back!" 

Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had re- 
mained at the wicket gate and was struggling 
with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. 
With a last desperate effort Dolokhov pushed 
the porter aside, and when Anatole ran back 
seized him by the arm, pulled him through the 
wicket, and ran back with him to the troyka. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

MARYA DMITRIEVN A, having found S6nya weep- 
ing in the corridor, made her confess every- 
thing, and intercepting the note to Natasha she 
read it and went into Natasha's room with it 
in her hand. 

"You shameless good-for-nothing!" said she. 
"I won't hear a word." 

Pushing back Natasha who looked at her 
with astonished but tearless eyes, she locked 
her in; and having given orders to the yard 
porter to admit the persons who would be com- 
ing that evening, but not to let them out again, 
and having told the footman to bring them up 
to her, she seated herself in the drawing room to 
await the abductors. 

When Gabriel came to inform her that the 
men who had come had run away again, she 
rose frowning, and clasping her hands behind 
her paced through the rooms a long time con- 
sidering what she should do. Toward midnight 
she went to Natasha's room fingering the key 
in her pocket. S6nya was sitting sobbing in the 
corridor. "MArya Dmitrievna, for God's sake 
let me in to herl" she pleaded, but Mdrya 
Dmitrievna unlocked the door and went in 



BOOK EIGHT 333 

without giving her an answer. . . . "Disgusting, 



abominable ... In my house . . . horrid girl, 
hussy! I'm only sorry for her father!" thought 
she, trying to restrain her wrath. "Hard as it 
may be, I'll tell them all to hold their tongues 
a^nd will hide it from the count." She entered 
the room with resolute steps. Natasha was lying 
on the sofa, her head hidden in her hands, and 
she did not stir. She was in just the same posi- 
tion in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her. 

"A nice girl! Very nice!" said Marya Dmi- 
trievna. "Arranging meetings with lovers in my 
house! It's no use pretending: you listen when 
I speak to you!" And Marya Dmitrievna 
touched her arm. "Listen when I speak! You've 
disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies. 
I'd treat you differently, but I'm sorry for your 
father, so I will conceal it." 

Natasha did not change her position, but her 
whole body heaved with noiseless, convulsive 
sobs which choked her. Marya Dmitrievna 
glanced round at Sonya and seated herself on 
the sofa beside Natasha. 

"It's lucky for him that he escaped me; but 
I'll find him!" she said in her rough voice. "Do 
you hear what I am saying or not?" she added. 

She put her large hand under Natasha's 
face and turned it toward her. Both Marya 
Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they 
saw how Natasha looked. Her eyes were dry 
and glistening, her lips compressed, her cheeks 
sunken. 

"Let me be! ... What is- it to me? ... I shall 
die!" she muttered, wrenching herself from 
Mdrya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious ef- 
fort and sinking down again into her former 
position. 

"Natalie!" said Mrya Dmitrievna. "I wish 
for your good. Lie still, stay like that then, I 
won't touch you. But listen. I won't tell you 
how guilty you are. You know that yourself. 
But when your father comes back tomorrow- 
what am I to tell him? Eh?" 

Again Natasha's body shook with sobs. 

"Suppose he finds out, and your brother, 
and your betrothed?" 

"I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" 
cried Natasha. 

"That's all the same," continued Mdrya Dmi- 
trievna. "If they hear of this, will they let it pass? 
He, your father, I know him ... if he chal- 
lenges him to a duel will that be all right? Eh?" 

"Oh, let me be! Why have you interfered at 
all? Why? Why? Who asked you to?" shouted 
Natisha, raising herself on the sofa and look- 
ing malignantly at M&amp;rya Dmitrievna. 



334 



WAR AND PEACE 



"But what did you want?" cried Mdrya Dmf- 
trievna, growing angry again. "Were you kept 
under lock and key? Who hindered his coming 
to the house? Why carry you off as if you were 
some gypsy singing girl? . . . Well, if he had car- 
ried you off ... do you think they wouldn't 
have found him? Your father, or brother, or 
your betrothed? And he's a scoundrel, a wretch 
that's a fact!" 

"He is better than any of you!" exclaimed 
Natdsha getting up. "If you hadn't interfered 
. . . Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it? 
Sonya, why? ... Go away!" 

And she burst into sobs with the despairing 
vehemence with which people bewail disasters 
they feel they have themselves occasioned. 
Mdrya Dmftrievna was about to speak again, 
but Natdsha cried out: 

"Go away! Go away! You all hate and despise 
me!" and she threw herself back on the sofa. 

Mdrya Dmitrievnawent on admonishing her 
for some time, en joining on her that it must all 
be kept from her father and assuring her that 
nobody would know anything about it if only 
Natdsha herself would undertake to forget it 
all and not let anyone see that something had 
happened. Natdsha did not reply, nor did she 
sob any longer, but she grew cold and had a 
shivering fit. Mdrya Dmitrievna put a pillow 
under her head, covered her with two quilts, 
and herself brought her some lime-flower wa- 
ter, but Natdsha did not respond to her. 

"Well, let her sleep," said Mdrya Dmitriev- 
na as she went out of the room supposing Na- 
tdsha to be asleep. 

But Natdsha was not asleep; with pale face 
and fixed wide-open eyes she looked straight 
before her. All that night she did not sleep or 
weep and did not speak to S6nya who got up 
and went to her several times. 

Next day Count Rostov returned from his 
estate near Moscow in time for lunch as he had 
promised. He was in very good spirits; the af- 
fair with the purchaser was going on satisfac- 
torily, and there was nothing to keep him any 
longer in Moscow, away from the countess 
whom he missed. Mdrya Dmftrievna met him 
and told him that Natdsha had been very un- 
well the day before and that they had sent for 
the doctor, but that she was better now. Na- 
tdsha had not left her room that morning. With 
compressed and parched lips and dry fixed 
eyes, she sat at the window, uneasily watching 
the people who drove past and hurriedly glanc- 
ing round at anyone who entered the room. 
She was evidently expecting news of him and 



that he would come or would write to her. 

When the count came to see her she turned 
anxiously round at the sound of a man's foot- 
step, and then her face resumed its cold and 
malevolent expression. She did not even get up 
to greet him. 

"What is the matter with you, my angel? Are 
you ill?" asked the count. 

After a moment's silence Natdsha answered: 
"Yes, ill." 

In reply to the count's anxious inquiries as 
to why she was so dejected and whether any- 
thing had happened to her betrothed, she as- 
sured him that nothinghad happened and asked 
him not to worry. Mdrya Dmftrievna confirmed 
Natdsha's assurances that nothing had hap- 
pened. From the pretense of illness, from his 
daughter's distress, and by the embarrassed 
faces of Sonya and Mdrya Dmftrievna, the 
count saw clearly that something had gone 
wrong during his absence, but it was so terrible 
for him to think that anything disgraceful had 
happened to his beloved daughter, and he so 
prized his own cheerful tranquillity, that he 
avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself 
that nothing particularly had happened; and 
he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition 
delayed their return to the country. 

CHAPTER XIX 

FROM THE DAY his wife arrived in Moscow 
Pierre had been intending to go away some- 
where, so as not to be near her. Soon after the 
Rostovs came to Moscow the effect Natdsha 
had on him made him hasten to carry out his 
intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph 
Alexe*evich's widow, who had long since prom- 
ised to hand over to him some papers of her 
deceased husband's. 

When he returned to Moscow Pierre was 
handed a letter from Mdrya Dmftrievna ask- 
ing him to come and see her on a matter of 
great importance relating to Andrew Bolkon- 
ski and his betrothed. Pierre had been avoid- 
ing Natdsha because it seemed to him that his 
feeling for her was stronger than a married 
man's should be for his friend's fiancde. Yet 
some fate constantly threw them together. 

"What can have happened? And what can 
they want with me?" thought he ashedressedto 
go to Mdrya Dmftrievna's. "If only Prince An- 
drew would hurry up and come and marry her I" 
thought he on his way to the house. 

On the Tversk6y Boulevard a familiar voice 
called to him. 

"Pierre! Been back long?" someone shouted. 



BOOK EIGHT 



335 



Pierre raised his head. In a sleigh drawn by two 
gray trotting-horses that were bespattering the 
dashboard with snow, Anatole and his constant 
companion Makdrin dashed past. Anatole was 
sitting upright in the classic pose of military 
dandies, the lower part of his face hidden by 
his beaver collar and his head slightly bent. His 
face was fresh and rosy, his white-plumed hat, 
tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and po- 
maded hair besprinkled with powdery snow. 

"Yes, indeed, that's a true sage," thought 
Pierre. "He sees nothing beyond the pleasure 
of the moment, nothing troubles him and so 
he is always cheerful, satisfied, and serene. 
What wouldn't I give to be like himl" he 
thought enviously. 

In Mdrya Dmitrievna's anteroom the foot- 
man who helped him off with his fur coat said 
that the mistress asked him to come to her bed- 
room. 

When he opened the ballroom door Pierre 
saw Natdsha sitting at the window, with a thin, 
pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round at 
him, frowned, and left the room with an ex- 
pression of cold dignity. 

"What has happened?" asked Pierre, enter- 
ing Marya Dmftrievna's room. 

"Fine doings {"answered Mdrya Drnitrievna. 
"For fifty-eight years have I lived in this world 
and never known anything so disgraceful!" 

And having put him on his honor not to 
repeat anything she told him, Mdrya Drnitri- 
evna informed him that Natasha had refused 
Prince Andrew without her parents' knowl- 
edge and that the cause of this was Anatole 
Kurdgin into whose society Pierre's wife had 
thrown her and with whom Natdsha had tried 
to elope during her father's absence, in order 
to be married secretly. 

Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open- 
mouthed to what was told him, scarcely able to 
believe his own ears. That Prince Andrew's 
deeply loved affianced wife the same Natdsha 
Rost6va who used to be so charming should 
give up Bolk6nski for that fool Anatole who 
was already secretly married (as Pierre knew), 
and should be so in love with him as to agree 
to run away with him, was something Pierre 
could not conceive and could not imagine. 

He could not reconcile the charming impres- 
sion he had of Natdsha, whom he had known 
from a child, with this new conception of her 
baseness, folly, and cruelty. He thought of his 
wife. "They are all alikel" he said to himself, 
reflecting that he was not the only man unfor- 
tunate enough to be tied to a bad woman. But 



still he pitied Prince Andrew to the point of 
tears and sympathized with his wounded pride, 
and the more he pitied his friend the more did 
he think with contempt and even with disgust 
of that Natdsha who had just passed him in 
the ballroom with such a look of cold dignity. 
He did not know that Natdsha's soul was over- 
flowing with despair, shame, and humiliation, 
and that it was not her fault that her face hap- 
pened to assume an expression of calm dignity 
and severity. 

"But how get married?" said Pierre, in an- 
swer to Mdrya Dmftrievna. "He could not 
marry he is married!" 

"Things get worse from hour to hour!" ejac- 
ulated Mdrya Dmftrievna. "A niceyouth! What 
a scoundrel! And she's expecting him expect- 
ing him since yesterday. She must be told! Then 
at least she won't go on expecting him." 

After hearing the details of Anatole's mar- 
riage from Pierre, and giving vent to her anger 
against Anatole in words of abuse, Mdrya 
Drnitrievna told Pierre why she had sent for 
him. She was afraid that the count or Bolk6n- 
ski, who might arrive at any moment, if they 
knew of this affair (which she hoped to hide 
from them) might challenge Anatole to a duel, 
and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his broth- 
er-in-law in her name to leave Moscow and not 
dare to let her set eyes on him again. Pierre- 
only now realizing the danger to the old count, 
Nicholas, and Prince Andrew promised to do 
as she wished. Having briefly and exactly ex- 
plained her wishes to him, she let him go to 
the drawing room. 

"Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as 
if you know nothing either," she said. "And I 
will go and tell her it is no use expecting him! 
And stay to dinner if you care to!" she called 
after Pierre. 

Pierre met the old count, who seemed nerv- 
ous and upset. That morning Natdsha had told 
him that she had rejected Bolk6nski. 

"Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he 
said to Pierre. "What troubles one has with 
these girls without their mother! I do so regret 

having come here I will be frank with you. 

Have you heard she has broken off her engage- 
ment without consulting anybody? It's true 
this engagement never was much to my liking. 
Of course he is an excellent man, but still, with 
his father's disapproval they wouldn't have 
been happy, and Natdsha won't lack suitors. 
Still, it has been going on so long, and to take 
such a step without father's or mother's con- 
sent! And now she's ill, and God knows what! 



336 



WAR AND PEACE 



It's hard, Count, hard to manage daughters in 
their mother's absence. . . ." 

Pierre saw that the count was much upset 
and tried to change the subject, but the count 
returned to his troubles. 

S6nya entered the room with an agitated 
face. 

"Natdsha is not quite well; she's in her room 
and would like to see you. Mdrya Dmftrievna 
is with her and she too asks you to come." 

"Yes, you are a great friend of Bolk6nski's, 
no doubt she wants to send him a message," 
said the count. "Oh dearl Oh dearl How happy 
it all was!" 

And clutching the spare gray locks on his 
temples the count left the room. 

When Mdrya Dmftrievna told Natdsha that 
Anatole was married, Natdsha did not wish to 
believe it and insisted on having it confirmed 
by Pierre himself. S6nya told Pierre this as she 
led him along the corridor to Natasha's room. 

Natdsha, pale and stern, was sitting beside 
Mdrya Dmftrievna, and her eyes, glittering fe- 
verishly, met Pierre with a questioning look 
the moment he entered. She did not smile or 
nod, butonlygazed fixedly at him, and her look 
asked only one thing: was he a friend, or like 
the others an enemy in regard to Anatole? As 
for Pierre, he evidently did not exist for her. 

"He knows all about it," said Mdrya Dmitri- 
evna pointing to Pierre and addressing Natd- 
sha. "Let him tell you whether I have told the 



//Natdsha looked from one to the other as a 
hunted and wounded animal looks at the ap- 
proaching dogs and sportsmen. 

"Natdlya Ilynfchna," Pierre began, drop- 
ping his eyes with a feeling of pity for her and 
loathing for the thing he had to do, "whether 
it is true or not should make no difference to 
you, because ..." 

"Then it is not true that he's married 1" 

"Yes, it is true." 

"Has he been married long?" she asked. "On 
your honor? . . ." 

Pierre gave his word of honor. 

"Is he still here?" she asked, quickly. 

"Yes, I have just seen him." 

She was evidently unable to speak and made a 
sign with her hands that they should leave her 
alone. 

CHAPTER XX 

PIERRE did not stay for dinner, but left the 
room and went away at once. He drove through 
the town seeking Anatole Kuragin, at the 



thought of whom now the blood rushed to his 
heart and he felt a difficulty in breathing. He 
was not at the ice hills, nor at the gypsies', nor 
at Komoneno's. Pierre drove to the Club. In 
the Club all was going on as usual. The mem- 
bers who were assembling for dinner were sit- 
ting about in groups; they greeted Pierre and 
spoke of the town news. The footman having 
greeted him, knowing his habits and his ac- 
quaintances, told him there was a place left 
for him in the small dining room and that 
Prince Michael Zakhdrych was in the library, 
but Paul Timofe*evich had not yet arrived. 
One of Pierre's acquaintances, while they were 
talking about the weather, asked if he had 
heard of Kuragin's abduction of Rostova which 
was talked of in the town, and was it true? 
Pierre laughed and said it was nonsense for he 
had just come from the Rostovs'. He asked 
everyone about Anatole. One man told him he 
had not come yet, and another that he was 
coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to sec 
this calm, indifferent crowd of people unaware 
of what was going on in his soul. He paced 
through the ballroom, waited till everyone had 
come, and as Anatole had not turned up did 
not stay for dinner but drove home. 

Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined 
that day with D61okhov, consulting him as to 
how to remedy this unfortunate affair. It 
seemed to him essential to see Natdsha. In the 
evening he drove to his sister's to discuss with 
her how to arrange a meeting. When Pierre re- 
turned home after vainly hunting all over 
Moscow, his valet informed him that Prince 
Anatole was with the countess. The countess' 
drawing room was full of guests. 

Pierre without greeting his wife whom lie 
had not seen since his return at that moment 
she was more repulsive to him than everen- 
tered the drawing room and seeing Anatole 
went up to him. 

"Ah, Pierre," said the countess going up to 
her husband. "You don't know what a plight 
our Anatole . . ." 

She stopped, seeing in the forward thrust of 
her husband's head, in his glowing eyes and his 
resolute gait, the terrible indications of that 
rage and strength which she knew and had 
herself experienced after his duel with D61okh- 
ov. 

"Where you are, there is vice and evill" said 
Pierre to his wife. "Anatole, come with me! I 
must speak to you," he added in French. 

Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose 
submissively, ready to follow Pierre. Pierre, 



BOOK EIGHT 



337 



taking him by the arm, pulled him to ward him- 
self and was leading him from the room. 

"If you allow yourself in my drawing room 
. . ." whispered Hel6ne, but Pierre did not re- 
ply and went out of the room. 

Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty 
step but his face betrayed anxiety. 

Having entered his study Pierre closed the 
door and addressed Anatole without looking 
at him. 

"You promised Countess Rost6va to marry 
her and were about to elope with her, is that 
so?" 

"Mon cher" answered Anatole (their whole 
conversation was in French), "I don't consider 
myself bound to answer questions put to me 
in that tone." 

Pierre's face, already pale, became distorted 
by fury. He seized Anatole by the collar of his 
uniform with his big hand and shook him 
from side to side till Anatole's face showed a 
sufficient degree of terror. 

"When I tell you that I must talk to you! 
. . ." repeated Pierre. 

"Come now, this is stupid. What?" said Ana- 
tole, fingering a button of his collar that had 
been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth. 

"You're a scoundrel and a blackguard, and 
I don't know what deprives me from the pleas- 
ure of smashing your head with this!" said 
Pierre, expressing himself so artificially because 
he was talking French. 

He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it 
threateningly, but at once put it back in its 
place. 

"Did you promise to marry her?" 

"I ... I ... I didn't think of it. I never prom- 
ised, because ..." 

Pierre interrupted him. 

"Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?" 
he said, moving toward Anatole. 

Anatole glanced at him and immediately 
thrust his hand into his pocket and drew out 
his pocketbook. 

Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him 
and, pushing aside a table that stood in his 
way, threw himself on the sofa. 

"1 shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said 
Pierre in answer to a frightened gesture of 
Anatole's. "First, the letters," said he, as if re- 
peating a lesson to himself. "Secondly," he con- 
tinued after a short pause, again rising and 
again pacing the room, "tomorrow you must 
get out of Moscow." 

"But how can I? . . ." 

"Thirdly/' Pierre continued without listen- 



ing to him, "you must never breathe a word 
of what has passed between you and Countess 
Rost6va. I know I can't prevent your doing so, 
but if you have a spark of conscience . . ." 
Pierre paced the room several times in silence. 
Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting 
his lips. 

"After all, you must understand that besides 
your pleasure there is such a thing as other 
people's happiness and peace, and that you are 
ruining a whole life for the sake of amusing 
yourself! Amuse yourself with women like my 
wife with them you are within your rights, 
for they know what you want of them. They 
are armed against you by the same experience 
of debauchery; but to promise a maid to marry 
her ... to deceive, to kidnap. . . . Don't you 
understand that it is as mean as beating an 
old man or a child? . . ." 

Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no 
longer with an angry but with a questioning 
look. 

"I don't know about that, eh?" said Anatole, 
growing more confident as Pierre mastered his 
wrath. "I don't know that and don't want to," 
he said, not looking at Pierre and with a slight 
tremor of his lower jaw, "but you have used 
such words to me 'mean* and so on which as 
a man of honor I can't allow anyone to use." 

Pierre glanced at him with amazement, un- 
able to understand what he wanted. 

"Though it was tete-a-tete," Anatole con- 
tinued, "still I can't . . ." 

"Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre 
ironically. 

"You could at least take back your words. 
What? If you want me to do as you wish, eh?" 

"I take them back, I take them back!" said 
Pierre, "and I ask you to forgive me." Pierre 
involun tarily glanc eel at the loose button. "And 
if you require money lor your journey . . ." 

Anatole smiled. The expression of that base 
and cringing smile, which Pierre knew so well 
in his wife, revolted him. 

"Oh, vile and heartless brood! "he exclaimed, 
and left the room. 

Next day Anatole left for Petersburg. 

CHAPTER XXI 

PIERRE drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her 
of the fulfillment of her wish that Kurdgin 
should be banished from Moscow. The whole 
house was in a state of alarm and commotion. 
Natdsha was very ill, having, as Mdrya Dmitri- 
evna told him in secret, poisoned herself the 
night after she had been told that Anatole was 



338 



WAR AND PEACE 



married, with some arsenic she had stealthily 
procured. After swallowing a little she had 
been so frightened that she woke S6nya and 
told her what she had done. The necessary 
antidotes had been administered in time and 
she was now out of danger, though still so 
weak that it was out of the question to move 
her to the country, and so the countess had 
been sent for. Pierre saw the distracted count, 
and S6nya, who had a tear-stained face, but he 
could not see Natasha. 

Pierre dined at the club that day and heard 
on all sides gossip about the attempted abduc- 
tion of Rost6va. He resolutely denied these 
rumors, assuring everyone that nothing had 
happened except that his brother-in-law had 
proposed to her and been refused. It seemed to 
Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole 
affair and re-establish Natdsha's reputation. 

He was awaiting Prince Andrew's return 
with dread and went every day to the old 
prince's for news of him. 

Old Prince Bolk6nski heard all the rumors 
current in the town from Mademoiselle Bouri- 
enne and had read the note to Princess Mary 
in which Natdsha had broken off her engage- 
ment. He seemed in better spirits than usual 
and awaited his son with great impatience. 

Some days after Anatole's departure Pierre 
received a note from Prince Andrew, inform- 
ing him of his arrival and asking him to come 
to see him. 

As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince An- 
drew had received from his father Natdsha's 
note to Princess Mary breaking off her engage- 
ment (Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined 
it from Princess Mary and given it to the old 
prince), and he heard from him the story of 
Natdsha's elopement, with additions. 

Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening 
and Pierre came to see him next morning. 
Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in al- 
most the same state as Natdsha and was there- 
fore surprised on entering the drawing room 
to hear him in the study talking in a loud ani- 
mated voice about some intrigue going on in 
Petersburg. The old prince's voice and anoth- 
er now and then interrupted him. Princess 
Mary came out to meet Pierre. She sighed, 
looking toward the door of the room where 
Prince Andrew was, evidently intending to ex- 
press her sympathy with his sorrow, but Pierre 
saw by her face that she was glad both at what 
had happened and at the way her brother had 
taken the news of Natasha's faithlessness. 

"He says he expected it," she remarked. "I 



know his pride will not let him express his 
feelings, but still he has taken it better, far 
better, than I expected. Evidently it had to 
be. . . ." 

"But is it possible that all is really ended?" 
asked Pierre. 

Princess Mary looked at him with astonish- 
ment. She did not understand how he could 
ask such a question. Pierre went into the study. 
Prince Andrew, greatly changed and plainly 
in better health, but with a fresh horizontal 
wrinkle between his brows, stood in civilian 
dress facing his father and Prince Meshchrski, 
warmly disputing and vigorously gesticulating. 
The conversation was a^out Sperdnski the 
news of whose sudden exile and alleged treach- 
ery had just reached Moscow. 

"Now he is censured and accused by all who 
were enthusiastic about him a month ago," 
Prince Andrew was saying, "and by those who 
were unable to understand his aims. To judge 
a man who is in disfavor and to throw on him 
all the blame of other men's mistakes is very 
easy, but I maintain that if anything good has 
been accomplished in this reign it was done by 
him, by him alone." 

He paused at the sight of Pierre. His face 
quivered and immediately assumed a vindictive 
expression. 

"Posterity will do him justice," he concluded, 
and at once turned to Pierre. 

"Well, how are you? Still getting stouter?" 
he said with animation, but the new wrinkle 
on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I am well," he 
said in answer to Pierre's question, and smiled. 

To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, 
but my health is now of no use to anyone." 

After a few words to Pierre about the awful 
roads from the Polish frontier, about people 
he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre, 
and about M. Dessalles, whom he had brought 
from abroad to be his son's tutor, Prince An- 
drew again joined warmly in the conversation 
about Sperdnski which was still going on be- 
tween the two old men. 

"If there were treason, or proofs of secret re- 
lations with Napoleon, they would have been 
made public," he said with warmth and haste. 
"I do not, and never did, like Sperdnski per- 
sonally, but I like justice!" 

Pierre now recognized in his friend a need 
with which he was only too familiar, to get ex- 
cited and to have arguments about extraneous 
matters in order to stifle thoughts that were 
too oppressive and too intimate. 

When Prince Meshch^rski had left, Prince 



Andrew took Pierre's arm and asked him into 
the room that had been assigned him. A bed 
had been made up there, and some open port- 
manteaus and trunks stood about. Prince An- 
drew went to one and took out a small casket, 
from which he drew a packet wrapped in pa- 
per. He did it all silently and very quickly. He 
stood up and coughed. His face was gloomy 
and his lips compressed. 

"Forgive me for troubling you. . . ." 

Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to 
speak of Natasha, and his broad face expressed 
pity and sympathy. This expression irritated 
Prince Andrew, and in a determined, ringing, 
and unpleasant tone he continued: 

"I have received a refusal from Countess 
Rost6va and have heard reports of your broth- 
er-in-law having sought her hand, or something 
of that kind. Is that true?" 

"Both true and untrue," Pierre began; but 
Prince Andrew interrupted him. 

"Here are her letters and her portrait," said 
he. 

He took the packet from the table and 
handed it to Pierre. 

"Give this to the countess ... if you see her." 

"She is very ill," said Pierre. 

"Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. 
"And Prince Kuragin?" he added quickly. 

"He left long ago. She has been at death's 
door." 

"I much regret her illness," said Prince An- 
drew; and he smiled like his father, coldly, 
maliciously, and unpleasantly. 

"So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored 
Countess Rost6va with his hand?" said Prince 
Andrew, and he snorted several times. 

"He could not marry, for he was married al- 
ready," said Pierre. 

Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again 
reminding one of his father. 

"And where is your brother-in-law now, if I 
may ask?" he said. 

"He has gone to Peters . . . But I don't know," 
said Pierre. 

"Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince An- 
drew. "Tell Countess Rost6va that she was 
and is perfectly free and that I wish her all 
that is good." 

Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if 
trying to remember whether he had something 
more to say, or waiting to see if Pierre would 
say anything, looked fixedly at him. 

"I say, do you remember our discussion in 
Petersburg?" asked Pierre, "about ..." 

"Yes," returned Prince Andrew hastily. "I 



BOOK EIGHT 359 

said that a fallen woman should be forgiven, 



but I didn't say I could forgive her. I can't." 

"But can this be compared . . .?" said Pierre. 

Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried 
sharply: "Yes, ask her hand again, be magnani- 
mous, and so on? . . . Yes, that would be very 
noble, but I am unable to follow in that gen- 
tleman's footsteps. If you wish to be my friend 
never speak to me of that ... of all that! Well, 
good-by. So you'll give her the packet?" 

Pierre left the room and went to the old 
prince and Princess Mary. 

The old man seemed livelier than usual. 
Princess Mary was the same as always, but be- 
neath her sympathy for her brother, Pierre 
noticed her satisfaction that the engagement 
had been broken off. Looking at them Pierre 
realized what contempt and animosity they all 
felt for the Rost6vs, and that it was impossible 
in their presence even to mention the name of 
her who could give up Prince Andrew for any- 
one else. 

At dinner the talk turned on the war, the 
approach of which was becoming evident. 
Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now 
with his father, now with the Swiss tutor Des- 
salles, and showing an unnatural animation, 
the cause of which Pierre so well understood. 

CHAPTER XXII 

THAT SAME EVENING Pierre went to the Ros- 
t6vs' to fulfill the commission entrusted to 
him. Natdsha was in bed, the count at the Club, 
and Pierre, after giving the letters to S6nya, 
went to Mdrya Dmitrievna who was interested 
to know how Prince Andrew had taken the 
news. Ten minutes later S6nya came to Mirya 
Dmitrievna. 

"Natdsha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirf- 
lovich," said she. 

"But how? Are we to take him up to her? 
The room there has not been tidied up." 

"No, she has dressed and gone into the draw- 
ing room," said S6nya. 

Mdrya Dmitrievna only shrugged her shoul- 
ders. 

"When will her mother come? She has wor- 
ried me to death! Now mind, don't tell her 
everything!" said she to Pierre. "One hasn't 
the heart to scold her, she is so much to be 
pitied, so much to be pitied." 

Natasha was standing in the middle of the 
drawing room, emaciated, with a pale set face, 
but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected 
to find her. When he appeared at the door she 
grew flurried, evidently undecided whether to 



340 



WAR AND PEACE 



go to meet him or to wait till he came up. 

Pierre hastened to her. He thought she 
would give him her hand as usual; but she, 
stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, 
her arms hanging lifelessly just in the pose she 
used to stand in when she went to the middle 
of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a dif- 
ferent expression of face. 

"Peter Kirf lovich," she began rapidly, "Prince 
Bolk6nski was your friend is your friend," 
she corrected herself. (It seemed to her that 
everything that had once been must now 
be different.) "He told me once to apply to 
you . . ." 

Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did 
not speak. Till then he had reproached herein 
his heart and tried to despise her, but he now 
felt so sorry for her that there was no room in 
his soul for reproach. 

"He is here now: tell him ... to for ... for- 
give me!" 

She stopped and breathed still more quick- 
ly, but did not shed tears. 

"Yes ... I will tell him," answered Pierre; 
"but . . ." 

He did not know what to say. 

Natdsha was evidently dismayed at the 
thoughtof what he might think she had meant. 

"No, I know all is over," she said hurriedly. 
"No, that can never be. I'm only tormented by 
the wrong I have done him. Tell him only that 
I beg him to forgive, forgive, forgive me for 
everything " 

She trembled all over and sat down on a 
chair. 

A sense of pity he had never before known 
overflowed Pierre's heart. 

"I will tell him, I will tell him everything 
once more," said Pierre. "But ... I should like 
to know one thing. . . ." 

"Know what?" Natdsha's eyes asked. 

"I should like to know, did you love . . ." 
Pierre did not know how to refer to Anatole 
and flushed at the thought of him "did you 
love that bad man?" 

"Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "But I 
don't know, don't know at all. . . ." 

She began to cry arid a still greater sense of 
pity, tenderness, and love welled up in Pierre. 
He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles 
and hoped they would not be noticed. 

"We won't speak of it any more, my dear," 
said Pierre, and his gentle, cordial tone sud- 
denly seemed very strange to Natdsha. . 

"We won't speak of it, my dear I'll tell him 
everything; but one thing 1 beg of you, con- 



sider me your friend and if you want help, ad- 
vice, or simply to open your heart to someone 
not now, but when your mind is clearer 
think of me!" He took her hand and kissed it, 
"I shall be happy if it's in my power . . ." 

Pierre grew confused. 

"Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth 
it!" exclaimed Natdsha and turned to leave the 
room, but Pierre held her hand. 

He knew he had something more to say to 
her. But when he said it he was amazed at his 
own words. 

"Stop, stop! You have your whole life be- 
fore you," said he to her. 

"Before me? No! All is over for me," she re- 
plied with shame and self-abasement. 

"All over?" he repeated. "If I were not my- 
self, but the handsomest, cleverest, and best 
man in the world, and were free, I would this 
moment ask on my knees for your hand and 
your love!" 

For the first time for many days Natdsha 
wept tears of gratitude and tenderness, and 
glancing at Pierre she went out of the room. 

Pierre too when she had gone almost ran in- 
to the anteroom, restraining tears of tender- 
ness and joy that choked him, and without 
finding the sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on 
and got into his sleigh. 

"Where to now, your excellency?" asked the 
coachman. 

"Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where 
can I go now? Surely not to the Club or to pay 
calls?" All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, in 
comparison with this feeling of tenderness and 
love he experienced: in comparison with that 
softened, grateful, last look she had given him 
through her tears. 

"Home!" said Pierre, and despite twenty- 
two degrees of frost Fahrenheit he threw open 
the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and 
inhaled the air with joy. 

It was clear and frosty. Above the dirty, ill- 
lit streets, above the black roofs, stretched the 
dark starry sky. Only looking up at the sky did 
Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating 
were all mundane things compared with the 
heights to which his soul had just been raised. 
At the entrance to the Arbdt Square an im- 
mense expanse of dark starry sky presented it- 
self to his eyes. Almost in the center of it, a- 
bove the Prechfstenka Boulevard, surrounded 
and sprinkled on all sides by stars but distin- 
guished from them all by its nearness to the 
earth, its white light, and its long uplifted tail, 
shone the enormous and brilliant comet of 



BOOK EIGHT 341 

1812 the comet which was said to portend all ly like an arrow piercing the earthto remain 
kinds of woes and the end of the world. In fixed in a chosen spot, vigorously holding its 
Pierre, however, that comet with its long lumi- tail erect, shining and displaying its white 
nous tail aroused no feeling of fear. On the lightamidcountlessotherscintillatingstars.lt 
contrary he gazed joyfully, his eyes moist with seemed to Pierre that this comet fully re- 
tears, at this bright comet which, having trav- sponded to what was passing in his own sof- 
cled in its orbit with inconceivable velocity tened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into 
through immeasurable space, seemed sudden- a new life. 



Book Nine: 1812 



CHAPTER I 

FROM THE CLOSE of the year 1811 an intensified 
arming and concentrating of the forces of 
Western Europe began, and in 1812 these 
forces millions of men, reckoning those trans- 
porting and feeding the army moved^from 
the west eastwards to the Russian frontier, to- 
ward which since 1811 Russian forces had been 
similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812, 
the forces of Western Europe crossed the Rus- 
sian frontier and war began, that is, an event 
took place opposed to human reason and to 
human nature. Millions of men perpetrated 
against one another such innumerable crimes, 
frauds, treacheries, thefts, forgeries, issues of 
false money, burglaries, incendiarisms, and 
murders as in whole centuries are not recorded 
in the annals of all the law courts of the world, 
but which those who committed them did not 
at the time regard as being crimes. 

What produced this extraordinary occur- 
rence? What were its causes? The historians 
tell us with nai've assurance that its causes were 
the wrongs inflicted on the Duke of Olden- 
burg, the nonobservance of the Continental 
System, the ambition of Napoleon, the firm- 
ness of Alexander, the mistakes of the diplo- 
matists, and so on. 

Consequently, it would only have been nec- 
essary for Metternich, Rumyanstev, or Talley- 
rand, between a levee and an evening party, to 
have taken proper pains and written a more 
adroit note, or for Napoleon to have written 
to Alexander: "My respected Brother, I con- 
sent to restore the duchy to the Duke of Old- 
enburg" and there would have been no war. 

We can understand that the matter seemed 
like that to contemporaries. It naturally seemed 
to Napoleon that the war was caused by Eng- 
land's intrigues (as in fact he said on the island 
of St. Helena). It naturally seemed to members 
of the English Parliament that the cause of the 
war was Napoleon's ambition; to the Duke of 
Oldenburg, that the cause of the war was the 
violence done to him; to businessmen that 



the cause of the war was the Continental Sys- 
tem which was ruining Europe; to the generals 
and old soldiers that the chief reason for the 
war was the necessity of giving them employ- 
ment; to the legitimists of that day that it was 
the need of re-establishing les bons principes, 
and to the diplomatists of that time that it all 
resulted from the fact that the alliance be- 
tween Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been 
sufficiently well concealed from Napoleon, and 
from the awkward wording of Memorandum 
No. 178. It is natural that these and a count- 
less and infinite quantity of other reasons, the 
number depending on the endless diversity of 
points of view, presented themselves to the 
men of that day; but to us, to posterity who 
view the thing that happened in all its magni- 
tude and perceive its plain and terrible mean- 
ing, these causes seem insufficient. To us it is 
incomprehensible that millions of Christian 
men killed and tortured each other either be- 
cause Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander 
was firm, or because England's policy was astute 
or the Duke of Oldenburg wronged. We can- 
not grasp what connection such circumstances 
have with the actual fact of slaughter and vio- 
lence: why because the Duke was wronged, 
thousands of men from the other side of Eu- 
rope killed and ruined the people of Smolensk 
and Moscow and were killed by them. 

To us, their descendants, who are not his- 
torians and are not carried away by the process 
of research and can therefore regard the event 
with unclouded common sense, an incalculable 
number of causes present themselves. The 
deeper we delve in search of these causes the 
more of them we find; and each separate cause 
or whole series of causes appears to us equally 
valid in itself and equally false by its insignif- 
icance compared to the magnitude of the 
events, and by its impotence apart from the 
cooperation of all the other coincident causes 
to occasion the event. To us, the wish or ob- 
jection of this or that French corporal to serve 
a second term appears as much a cause as Na- 



34* 



BOOK NINE 



343 



poleon's refusal to withdraw his troops beyond 
the Vistula and to restore the duchy of Olden- 
burg; for had he not wished to serve, and had 
a second, a third, and a thousandth corporal 
and private also refused, there would have 
been so many less men in Napoleon's army 
and the war could not have occurred. 

Had Napoleon not taken offense at the de- 
mand that he should withdraw beyond the 
Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, 
there would have been no war; but had all his 
sergeants objected to serving a second term 
then also there could have been no war. Nor 
could there have been a war had there been 
no English intrigues and no Duke of Olden- 
burg, and had Alexander not felt insulted, and 
had there not been an autocratic government 
in Russia, or a Revolution in France and a 
subsequent dictatorship and Empire, or all the 
things that produced the French Revolution, 
and so on. Without each of these causes noth- 
ing could have happened. So all these causes- 
myriads of causes coincided to bring it about. 
And so there was no one cause for that occur- 
rence, but it had to occur because it had to. 
Millions of men, renouncing their human feel- 
ings and reason, had to go from west to east to 
slay their fellows, just as some centuries previ- 
ously hordes of men had come from the east to 
the west, slaying their fellows. 

The actions ot Napoleon and Alexander, on 
whose words the event seemed to hang, were 
as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier 
who was drawn into the campaign by lot or by 
conscription. This could not be otherwise, for 
in order that the will of Napoleon and Alex- 
ander (on whom the event seemed to depend) 
should be carried out, the concurrence of in- 
numerable circumstances was needed without 
any one of which the event could not have tak- 
en place. It was necessary that millions of men 
in whose hands lay the real power the soldiers 
who fired, or transported provisions and guns 
should consent to carry out the will of these 
weak individuals, and should have been in- 
duced to do so by an infinite numberof diverse 
and complex causes. 

We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an 
explanation of irrational events (that is to say, 
events the reasonableness of which we do not 
understand). The more we try to explain such 
events in history reasonably, the more unrea- 
sonable and incomprehensible do they become 
to us. 

Each man lives for himself, using his free- 
dom to attain his personal aims, and feels with 



his whole being that he can now do or abstain 
from doing this or that action; but as soon as 
he has done it, that action performed at a cer- 
tain moment in time becomes irrevocable and 
belongs to history, in which it has not a free 
but a predestined significance. 

There are two sides to the life of every man, 
his individual life, which is the more free the 
more abstract its interests, and his elemental 
hive life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid 
down for him. 

Man lives consciously for himself, but is an 
unconscious instrument in the attainment of 
the historic, universal, aims of humanity. A 
deed done is irrevocable, and its result coin- 
ciding in time with the actions of millions of 
other men assumes anhistoricsignificance.The 
higher a man stands on the social ladder, the 
more people he is connected with and the 
more power he has over others, the more evi- 
dent is the predestination and inevitability of 
his every action. 

"The king's heart is in the hands of the 
Lord." 

A king is history's slave. 

History, that is, the unconscious, general, 
hive life of mankind, uses every moment of 
the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes. 

Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was 
more convinced than ever that it depended on 
him, verser (on ne pas verser) le sang de ses 
peuples l as Alexander expressed it in the last 
letter he wrote him he had never been so 
much in the grip of inevitable laws, which com- 
pelled him, while thinking that he was acting 
on his own volition, to perform for the hive 
life that is to say, for history whatever had 
to be performed. 

The people of the west moved eastwards to 
slay their fellow men, and by the law of coin- 
cidence thousands of minute causes fitted in 
and co-ordinated to produce that movement 
and war: reproaches for the nonobservance of 
the Continental System, the Duke of Olden- 
burg's wrongs, the movement of troops into 
Prussia undertaken (as it seemed to Napo- 
leon) only for the purpose of securing an 
armed peace, the French Emperor's love and 
habit of war coinciding with his people's in- 
clinations, allurement by the grandeur of the 
preparations, and the expenditure on those 
preparations and the need of obtaining ad- 
vantages to compensate for that expenditure, 
the intoxicating honors he received in Dres- 

1 "To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peo- 
ples." 



344 



WAR AND PEACE 



den, the diplomatic negotiations which, in the 
opinion of contemporaries, were carried on 
with a sincere desire to attain peace, but which 
only wounded the self-love of both sides, and 
millions and millions of other causes that 
adapted themselves to the event that was 
happening or coincided with it. 

When an apple has ripened and falls, why 
does it fall? Because of its attraction to the 
earth, because its stalk withers, because it is 
dried by the sun, because it grows heavier, be- 
cause the wind shakes it, or because the boy 
standing below wants to eat it? 

Nothing is the cause. All this is only the co- 
incidence of conditions in which all vital or- 
ganic and elemental events occur. And the 
botanist who finds that the apple falls because 
the cellular tissue decays and so forth is equal- 
ly right with the child who stands under the 
tree and says the apple fell because he wanted 
to eat it and prayed for it. Equally right or 
wrong is he who says that Napoleon went to 
Moscow because he wanted to, and perished 
because Alexander desired his destruction, and 
he who says that an undermined hill weighing 
a million tons fell because the last navvy struck 
it for the last time with his mattock. In historic 
events, the so-called great men are labels giv- 
ing names to events, and like labels they have 
but the smallest connection with the event it- 
self. 

Every act of theirs, which appears to them 
an act of their own will, is in an historical 
sense involuntary and is related to the whole 
course of history and predestined from eternity. 

CHAPTER II 

ON THE TWENTY-NINTH OF MAY Napoleon left 

Dresden, 1 where he had spent three weeks sur- 
rounded by a court that included princes, 
dukes, kings, and even an emperor. Before 
leaving, Napoleon showed favor to the em- 
peror, kings, and princes who had deserved it, 
reprimanded the kings and princes with whom 
he was dissatisfied, presented pearls and dia- 
monds of his ownthat is, which he had taken 
from other kings to the Empress of Austria, 
and having, as his historian tells us, tenderly 
embraced the Empress Marie Louisewho re- 
garded him as her husband, though he had left 
another wife in Paris left her grieved by the 
parting which she seemed hardly able to bear. 
Though the diplomatists still firmly believed 
in the possibility of peace and worked zealous- 

1 According to the Gregorian or "New Style" cal- 
endar. TR. 



ly to that end, and though the Emperor Napo- 
leon himself wrote a letter to Alexander, call- 
ing him Monsieur mon frere, and sincerely as- 
sured him that he did not want war and would 
always love and honor him yet he set off to 
join his army, and at every station gave fresh 
orders to accelerate the movement of his troops 
from west to east. He went in a traveling coach 
with six horses, surrounded by pages, aides-de- 
camp, and an escort, along the road to Posen, 
Thorn, Danzig, and Konigsberg. At each of 
these towns thousands of people met him with 
excitement and enthusiasm. 

The army was moving from west to east, and 
relays of six horses carried him in the same 
direction. On the tenth of June, 2 coming up 
with the army, he spent the night in apart- 
ments prepared for him on the estate of a 
Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest. 

Next day, overtaking the army, he went in 
a carriage to the Niemen, and, changing into 
a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in 
order to select a place for the crossing. 

Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (Ics 
Cosaques) and the wide-spreading steppes in 
the midst of which lay the holy city of Moscow 
(Moscou, la ville sainte), the capital of a realm 
such as the Scythia into which Alexander the 
Great had marched Napoleon unexpectedly, 
and contrary alike to strategic and diplomatic 
considerations, ordered an advance, and the 
next day his army began to cross the Niemen. 

Early in the morning of the twelfth of June 
he came out of his tent, which was pitched that 
day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, and 
looked through a spyglass at the streams of his 
troops pouring out of the Vilkavisski forest 
and flowing over the three bridges thrown 
across the river. The troops, knowing of the 
Emperor's presence, were on the lookout for 
him, and when they caught sight of a figure in 
an overcoat arid a cocked hat standing apart 
from his suite in front of his tent on the hill, 
they threw up their caps and shouted: "Vive 
VEmpereur!" and one after another poured in 
a ceaseless stream out of the vast forest that 
had concealed them and, separating, flowed on 
and on by the three bridges to the other side. 

"Now we'll go into action. Oh, when he 
takes it in hand himself, things get hot ... by 
heaven! . . . There he is! ... Vive VEmpereur! 
So these are the steppes of Asia! It's a nasty 
country all the same. Au revoir, Beauchd; I'll 
keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au 
revoir. Good luck! . . . Did you see the Emper- 

a Old style. 



BOOK 

or? Vive I'Empereur! . . . preur!\l they make 
me Governor of India, Gerard, I'll make you 
Minister of Kashmir that's settled. Vive I'Em- 
pereur! Hurrah I hurrah! hurrah! The Cos- 
sacksthose rascals see how they run! Vive 
I'Empereur! There he is, do you see him? I've 
seen him twice, as I see you now. The little 
corporal ... I saw him give the cross to one of 
the veterans. . . . Vive I'Empereur!" came the 
voices of men, old and young, of most diverse 
characters and social positions. On the faces 
of all was one common expression of joy at the 
commencement of the long-expected campaign 
and of rapture and devotion to the man in the 
gray coat who was standing on the hill. 

On the thirteenth of June a rather small, 
thoroughbred Arab horse was brought to Na- 
poleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to 
one of the bridges over the Niemcn, deafened 
continually by incessant and rapturous accla- 
mations which he evidently endured only be- 
cause it was impossible to forbid the soldiers to 
express their love of him by such shouting, but 
the shouting which accompanied him every- 
where disturbed him and distracted him from 
the military cares that had occupied him from 
the time he joined the army. He rode across 
one of the swaying pontoon bridges to the far- 
ther side, turned sharply to the left, and gal- 
loped in the direction of K6vno, preceded by 
enraptured, mounted chasseurs of the Guard 
who, breathless with delight, galloped ahead 
to clear a path for him through the troops. On 
reaching the broad river Viliya, he stopped 
near a regiment of Polish Uhlans stationed by 
the river. 

"Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, 
breaking their ranks and pressing against one 
another to see him. 

Napoleon looked up and down the river, 
dismounted, and sat down on a log that lay on 
the bank. At a mute sign from him, a telescope 
was handed him which he rested on the back 
of a happy page who had run up to him, and 
he gazed at the opposite bank. Then he be- 
came absorbed in a map laid out on the logs. 
Without lifting his head he said something, 
and two of his aides-de-camp galloped off to 
the Polish Uhlans. 

"What? What did he say?" was heard in the 
ranks of the Polish Uhlans when one of the 
aides-de-camp rode up to them. 

The order was to find a ford and to cross the 
river. The colonel of the Polish Uhlans, a' 
handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in 
his speech from excitement, asked the aide-de- 



NINE 345 

camp whether he would be permitted to swim 
the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a 
ford. In evident fear of refusal, like a boy asking 
for permission to get on a horse, he begged to 
be allowed to swim across the river before the 
Emperor's eyes. The aide-de-camp replied that 
probably the Emperor would not be displeased 
at this excess of zeal. 

As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this, 
the old mustached officer, with happy face and 
sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted "Fi- 
vat!" and, commanding the Uhlans to follow 
him, spurred his horse and galloped into the 
river. He gave an angry thrust to his horse, 
which had grown restive under him, and 
plunged into the water, heading for the deep- 
est part where the current was swift. Hun- 
dreds of Uhlans galloped in after him. It was 
cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the 
middle of the stream, and the Uhlans caught 
hold of one another as they fell off their horses. 
Some of the horses were drowned and some of 
the men; the others tried to swim on, some in 
the saddle and some clinging to their horses' 
manes. They tried to make their way forward 
to the opposite bank and, though there was a 
ford one third of a mile away, were proud that 
they were swimming and drowning in this riv- 
er under the eyes of the man who sat on the 
log and was not even looking at what they 
were doing. When the aide-de-camp, having re- 
turned and choosing an opportune moment, 
ventured to draw the Emperor's attention to 
the devotion of the Poles to his person, the lit- 
tle man in the gray overcoat got up and, hav- 
ing summoned Berthier, began pacing up and 
down the bank with him, giving him instruc- 
tions and occasionally glancing disapproving- 
ly at the drowning Uhlans who distracted his 
attention. 

For him it was no new conviction that his 
presence in any part of the world, from Africa 
to the steppes of Muscovy alike, was enough to 
dumfound people and impel them to insane 
self-oblivion. He called for his horse and rode 
to his quarters. 

Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the riv- 
er, though boats were sent to their assistance. 
The majority struggled back to the bank from 
which they had started. The colonel and some 
of his men got across and with difficulty clam- 
bered out on the further bank. And as soon as 
they had got out, in their soaked and stream- 
ing clothes, they shouted "Vivat!'' and looked 
ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had 
been but where he no longer was and at that 



346 

moment considered themselves happy. 

That evening, between issuing one order 
that the forged Russian paper money prepared 
for use in Russia should be delivered as quick- 
ly as possible and another that a Saxon should 
be shot, on whom a letter containing informa- 
tion about the orders to the French army had 
been found, Napoleon also gave instructions 
that the Polish colonel who had needlessly 
plunged into the river should be enrolled in 
the Legion d'honneur of which Napoleon was 
himself the head. 

Quos vult perdere demcntat* 

CHAPTER III 

THE EMPEROR OF RUSSIA had, meanwhile, been 
in Vilna for more than a month, reviewing 
troops and holding maneuvers. Nothing was 
ready for the war that everyone expected and 
to prepare for which the Emperor had come 
from Petersburg. There was no general plan 
of action. The vacillation between the various 
plans that were proposed had even increased 
after the Emperor had been at headquarters 
for a month. Each of the three armies had its 
own commander in chief, but there was no 
supreme commander of all the forces, and the 
Emperor did not assume that responsibility 
himself. 

The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna 
the less did everybodytired of waiting pre- 
pare for the war. All the efforts of those who 
surrounded the sovereign seemed directed 
merely to making him spend his time pleasant- 
ly and forget that war was impending. 

In June, after many balls and fetes given by 
the Polish magnates, by the courtiers, and by 
the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the 
Polish aides-de-camp in attendance that a din- 
ner and ball should be given for the Emperor 
by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eagerly re- 
ceived. The Emperor gave his consent. The 
aides-de-camp collected money by subscription. 
The lady who was thought to be most pleasing 
to the Emperor was invited to act as hostess. 
Count Bennigsen, being a landowner in the 
Vilna province, offered his country house for 
the fete, and the thirteenth of June was fixed 
for a ball, dinner, regatta, and fireworks at 
Zakret, Count Bennigsen's country seat. 

The very day that Napoleon issued the or- 
der to cross the Niemen, and his vanguard, 
driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian 
frontier, Alexander spent the evening at the 

1 Those whom (God) wishes to destroy he drives 
mad. 



WAR AND PEACE 

entertainment given by Jus aides-de-camp at 
Bennigsen's country house. 

It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs 
of such matters declared that rarely had so 
many beautiful women been assembled in one 
place. Countess Beziikhova was present among 
other Russian ladies who had followed the sov- 
ereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed 
the refined Polish ladies by her massive, so- 
called Russian type of beauty. The Emperor 
noticed her and honored her with a dance. 

Boris Drubetsk6y, having left his wife in 
Moscow and being for the present en gargon 
(as he phrased it), was also there and, though 
not an aide-de-camp, had subscribed a large 
sum toward the expenses. Boris was now a rich 
man who had risen to high honors and no 
longer sought patronage but stood on an equal 
footing with the highest of those of his own 
age. He was meeting Hlne in Vilna after not 
having seen her for a long time and did not 
recall the past, but as Hdfcne was enjoying the 
favors of a very important personage and Boris 
had only recently married, they met as good 
friends of long standing. 

At midnight dancing was still going on. 
Hlne, not having a suitable partner, herself 
offered to dance the mazurka with Boris. They 
were the third couple. Boris, coolly looking at 
Hlne's dazzling bare shoulders which e- 
merged from a dark, gold-embroidered, gauze 
gown, talked to her of old acquaintances and 
at the same time, unaware of it himself and 
unnoticed by others, never for an instant 
ceased to observe the Emperor who was in the 
same room. The Emperor was not dancing, he 
stood in the doorway, stopping now one pair 
and now another with gracious words which 
he alone knew how to utter. 

As the mazurka began, Boris saw that Adju- 
tant General Balashev, one of those in closest 
attendance on the Emperor, went up to him 
and contrary to court etiquette stood near him 
while he was talking to a Polish lady. Having 
finished speaking to her, the Emperor looked 
inquiringly at Balashev and, evidently under- 
standing that he only acted thus because there 
were important reasons for so doing, nodded 
slightly to the lady and turned to him. Hardly 
had Balashgv begun to speak before a look of 
amazement appeared on the Emperor's face. 
He took Balashev by the arm and crossed the 
room with him, unconsciously clearing a path 
seven yards wide as the people on both sides 
made way for him. Boris noticed Arakchev's 
excited face when the sovereign went out with 



Balashe'v. Arakche*ev looked at the Emperor 
from under his brow and, sniffing with his red 
nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if ex- 
pecting the Emperor to address him. (Boris 
understood that Arakche"ev envied Balashev 
and was displeased that evidently important 
news had reached the Emperor otherwise than 
through himself.) 

But the Emperor and Balashev passed out 
into the illuminated garden without noticing 
Arakchev who, holding his sword and glanc- 
ing wrathfully around, followed some twenty 
paces behind them. 

All the time Boris was going through the 
figures of the mazurka, he was worried by the 
question of what news Balashev had brought 
and how he could find it out before others. 

In the figure in which he had to choose two 
ladies, he whispered to Hlne that he meant 
to choose Countess Potocka who, he thought, 
had gone out onto the veranda, and glided over 
the parquet to the door opening into the gar- 
den, where, seeing Balashev and the Emperor 
returning to the veranda, he stood still. They 
were moving toward the door. Boris, fluttering 
as if he had not had time to withdraw, respect- 
fully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed 
head. 

The Emperor, with the agitation of one who 
has been personally affronted, was finishing 
with these words: 

"To enter Russia without declaring war! I 
will not make peace as long as a single armed 
enemy remains in my country!" 

It seemed to Boris that it gave the Emperor 
pleasure to utter these words. He was satisfied 
with the form in which he had expressed his 
thoughts, but displeased that Boris had over- 
heard it. 

"Let no one know of it!" the Emperor added 
with a frown. 

Boris understood that this was meant for 
him and, closing his eyes, slightly bowed his 
head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom 
and remained there about another half-hour. 

Boris was thus the first to learn the news 
that the French army had crossed the Niemen 
and, thanks to this, was able to show certain 
important personages that much that was con- 
cealed from others was usually known to him, 
and by this means he rose higher in their esti- 
mation. 

\ 

The unexpected news of the French having 
crossed the Niemen was particularly startling 
after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and 



BOOK NINE 347 

at a ball. On first receiving the news, under the 



influence of indignation and resentment the 
Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him, 
fully expressed his feelings, and has since be- 
come famous. On returning home at two 
o'clock that night he sent for his secretary, 
Shishk6v, and told him to write an order to 
the troops and a rescript to Field Marshal 
Prince Saltyk6v, in which he insisted on the 
words being inserted that he would not make 
peace so long as a single armed Frenchman re- 
mained on Russian soil. 

Next day the following letter was sent to 
Napoleon: 

Monsieur mon fr&amp;re, 

Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with 
which I have kept my engagements with Your 
Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian 
frontier, and I have this moment received from 
Petersburg a note, in which Count Lauriston in- 
forms me, as a reason for this aggression, that Your 
Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of 
war with me from the time Prince Kurakin asked 
for his passports. The reasons on which the Due 
de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to 
him would never have led me to suppose that that 
incident could serve as a pretext for aggression. In 
fact, the ambassador, as he himself has declared, 
was never authorized to make that demand, and 
as soon as I was informed of it I let him know how 
much I disapproved of it and ordered him to re- 
main at his post. If Your Majesty does not intend 
to shed the blood of our peoples for such a mis- 
understanding, and consents to withdraw your 
troops from Russian territory, I will regard what 
has passed as not having occurred and an under- 
standing between us will be possible. In the con- 
trary case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced 
to repel an attack that nothing on my part has 
provoked. It still depends on Your Majesty to pre- 
serve humanity from the calamity of another war. 
I am, etc., 

(signed) ALEXANDER 

CHAPTER IV 

AT TWO in the morning of the fourteenth of 
June, the Emperor, having sent for Balashev 
and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered 
him to take it and hand it personally to the 
French Emperor. When dispatching Balashev, 
the Emperor repeated to him the worcfc that 
he would not make peace so long as a single 
armed enemy remained on Russian soil and 
told him to transmit those words to Napoleon. 
Alexander did not insert them in his letter to 
Napoleon, because with his characteristic tact 
he felt it would be injudicious to use them at 
a moment when a last attempt at reconcili- 



348 

ation was being made, but he definitely in- 
structed Balashev to repeat them personally to 
Napoleon. 

Having set off in the small hours of the four- 
teenth, accompanied by a bugler and two Cos- 
sacks, Balashev reached the French outposts at 
the village of Ryk6nty, on the Russian side of 
the Niemen, by dawn. There he was stopped 
by French cavalry sentinels. 

A French noncommissioned officer of hus- 
sars, in crimson uniform and a shaggy cap, 
shouted to the approaching Balashev to halt. 
Balashev did not do so at once, but continued 
to advance along the road at a walking pace. 

The noncommissioned officer frowned and, 
muttering words of abuse, advanced his horse's 
chest against Balashev, put his hand to his 
saber, and shouted rudely at the Russian gen- 
eral, asking: was he deaf that he did not do as 
he was told? Balashev mentioned who he was. 
The noncommissioned officer began talking 
with his comrades about regimental matters 
without looking at the Russian general. 

After living at the seat of the highest author- 
ity and power, after conversing with the Em- 
peror less than three hours before, and in gen- 
eral being accustomed to the respect due to his 
rank in the service, Balashcv found it very 
strange here on Russian soil to encounter this 
hostile, and still more this disrespectful, appli- 
cation of brute force to himself. 

The sun was only just appearing from be- 
hind the clouds, the air was fresh and dewy. A 
herd of cattle was being driven along the road 
from the village, and over the fields the larks 
rose trilling, one after another, like bubbles 
rising in water. 

Balashev looked around him, awaiting the 
arrival of an officer from the village. The Rus- 
sian Cossacks and bugler and the French hus- 
sars looked silently at one another from time 
to time. 

A French colonel of hussars, who had evi- 
dently just left his bed, came riding from the 
village on a handsome sleek gray horse, accom- 
panied by two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, 
and their horses all looked smart and well 
kept. 

It was that first period of a campaign when 
troops are still in full trim, almost like that of 
peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade of mar- 
tial swagger in their clothes, and a touch of the 
gaiety and spirit of enterprise which always ac- 
company the opening of a campaign. 

The French colonel with difficulty repressed 
a yawn, but was polite and evidently under- 



WAR AND PEACE 

stood BalasheVs importance. He led him past 
his soldiers and behind the outposts and told 
him that his wish to be presented to the Em- 
peror would most likely be satisfied immedi- 
ately, as the Emperor's quarters were, he be- 
lieved, not far off. 

They rode through the village of Ryk6nty, 
past tethered French hussar horses, past senti- 
nels and men who saluted their colonel and 
stared with curiosity at a Russian uniform, and 
came out at the other end of the village. The 
colonel said that the commander of the divi- 
sion was a mile and a quarter away and would 
receive Balashev and conduct him to his desti- 
nation. 

The sun had by now risen and shone gaily 
on the bright verdure. 

They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a 
tavern, before they saw a group of horsemen 
coming toward them. In front of the group, on 
a black horse with trappings that glittered in 
the sun, rode a tall man with plumes in his hat 
and black hair curling down to his shoulders. 
He wore a red mantle, and stretched his long 
legs forward in French fashion. This man rode 
toward Balashev at a gallop, his plumes flow- 
ing and his gems and gold lace glittering in 
the bright June sunshine. 

Balashev was only two horses' length from 
the equestrian with the bracelets, plumes, neck- 
laces, and gold embroidery, who was galloping 
toward him with a theatrically solemn counte- 
nance, when Julner, the French colonel, whis- 
pered respectfully: "The King of Naples!" It 
was, in fact, Murat, now called "King of Na- 
ples." Though it was quite incomprehensible 
why he should be King of Naples, he was 
called so, and was himself convinced that he 
was so, and therefore assumed a more solemn 
and important air than formerly. He was so 
sure that he really was the King of Naples that 
when, on the eve of his departure from that 
city, while walking through the streets with his 
wife, some Italians called out to him: "Viva il 
re!" 1 he turned to his wife with a pensive smile 
and said: "Poor fellows, they don't know that I 
am leaving them tomorrow I" 

But though he firmly believed himself to be 
King of Naples and pitied the grief felt by the 
subjects he was abandoning, latterly, after he 
had been ordered to return to military service 
and especially since his last interview with 
Napoleon in Dan/ig, when his august brother- 
in-law had told him: "I made you King that 
you should reign in my way, but not in yours I" 

1 "Long live the King!" 



BOOK NINE 



349 



he had cheerfully taken up his familiar busi- 
ness, andlike a well-fed but not overfat horse 
that feels himself in harness and grows skittish 
between the shafts he dressed up in clothes 
as variegated and expensive as possible, and 
gaily and contentedly galloped along theroads 
of Poland, without himself knowing why or 
whither. 

On seeing the Russian general he threw back 
his head, with its long hair curling to his shoul- 
ders, in a majestically royal manner, and looked 
inquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel 
respectfully informed His Majesty of Balashev's 
mission, whose name he could not pronounce. 

"De Bal-machve!" said the King (overcom- 
ing by his assurance the difficulty that had pre- 
sented itself to the colonel). "Charmed to make 
your acquaintance, General!" he added, with 
a gesture of kingly condescension. 

As soon as the King began to speak loud 
and fast his royal dignity instantly forsook him, 
and without noticing it he passed into his nat- 
ural tone of good-natured familiarity. He laid 
his hand on the withers of Balashev's horse 
and said: 

"Well, General, it all looks like war," as if 
regretting a circumstance of which he was un- 
able to judge. 

"Your Majesty," replied Balashev, "my mas- 
ter, the Emperor, does not desire war and as 
Your Majesty sees . . ." said Balashe'v, using the 
words Your Majesty at every opportunity, with 
the affectation unavoidable in frequently 
addressing one to whom the title was still a 
novelty. 

Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction 
as he listened to "Monsieur de Bal-macheve." 
But royautt oblige!* and he felt it incumbent 
on him, as a king and an ally, to confer on 
state affairs with Alexander's envoy. He dis- 
mounted, took Balashev's arm, and moving a 
few steps away from his suite, which waited 
respectfully, began to pace up and down with 
him, trying to speak significantly. He referred 
to the fact that the Emperor Napoleon had re- 
sented the demand that he should withdraw 
his troops from Prussia, especially when that 
demand became generally known and the dig- 
nity of France was thereby offended. 

Balashe'v replied that there was nothing of- 
fensive in the demand, because . . . but Murat 
interrupted him. 

"Then you don't consider the Emperor Alex- 
ander the aggressor?" he asked unexpectedly, 
with a kindly and foolish smile. 

1 "Royalty has its obligations." 



Balashe'v told him why he considered Napo- 
leon to be the originator of the war. 

"Oh, my dear general!" Murat again inter- 
rupted him, "with all my heart I wish the Em- 
perors may arrange the affair between them, 
and that the war begun by no wish of mine 
may finish as quickly as possiblel" said he, in 
the tone of a servant who wants to remain 
good friends with another despite a quarrel 
between their masters. 

And he went on to inquiries about the Grand 
Duke and the state of his health, and to remi- 
niscences of the gay and amusing times he had 
spent with him in Naples. Then suddenly, as 
if remembering his royal dignity, Murat sol- 
emnly drew himself up, assumed the pose in 
which he had stood at his coronation, and, wav- 
ing his right arm, said: 

"I won't detain you longer, General. I wish 
success to your mission," and with his em- 
broidered red mantle, his flowing feathers, and 
his glittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite 
who were respectfully awaiting him. 

Balashev rode on, supposing from Murat's 
words that he would very soon be brought be- 
fore Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at 
the next village the sentinels of Davout's in- 
fantry corps detained him as the pickets of the 
vanguard had done, and an adjutant of the 
corps commander, who was fetched, conducted 
him into the village to Marshal Davout. 

CHAPTER V 

DAVOUT WAS TO NAPOLEON what Arakchdev 
was to Alexander though not a coward like 
Arakchdev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as 
unable to express his devotion to his monarch 
except by cruelty. 

In the organism of states such men are nec- 
essary, as wolves are necessary in the organism 
of nature, and they always exist, always appear 
and hold their own, however incongruous their 
presence and their proximity to the head of 
the government may be. This inevitability 
alone can explain how the cruel Arakch^ev, 
who tore out a grenadier's mustache with his 
own hands, whose weak nerves rendered him 
unable to face danger, and who was neither 
an educated man nor a courtier, was able to 
maintain his powerful position with Alexan- 
der, whose own character was chivalrous, no- 
ble, and gentle. 

Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel 
in the shed of a peasant's hut, writing he was 
auditing accounts. Better quarters could have 
been found him, but Marshal Davout was one 



35 



WAR AND PEACE 



of those men who purposely put themselves in 
most depressing conditions to have a justifica- 
tion for being gloomy. For the same reason 
they are always hard at work and in a hurry. 
"How can I think of the bright side of life 
when, as you see, I am sitting on a barrel and 
working in a dirty shed?" the expression of 
his face seemed to say. The chief pleasure and 
necessity of such men, when they encounter 
anyone who shows animation, is to flaunt their 
own dreary, persistent activity. Davout allowed 
himself that pleasure when Balashev was 
brought in. He became still more absorbed in 
his task when the Russian general entered, and 
after glancing ove^ his spectacles at BalasheVs 
face, which was animated by the beauty of the 
morning and by his talk with Murat, he did 
not rise or even stir, but scowled still more and 
sneered malevolently. 

When he noticed in Balashev's face the dis- 
agreeable impression this reception produced, 
Davout raised his head and coldly asked what 
he wanted. 

Thinking he could have been received in 
such a manner only because Davout did not 
know that he was adjutant general to the Em- 
peror Alexander and even his envoy to Napo- 
leon, Balashev hastened to inform him of his 
rank and mission. Contrary to his expectation, 
Davout, after hearing him, became still surlier 
and ruder. 

"Where is your dispatch?" he inquired. 
"Give it to me. I will send it to the Emperor." 

Balashev replied that he had been ordered 
to hand it personally to the Emperor. 

"Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your 
army, but here," said Davout, "you must do 
as you're told." 

And, as if to make the Russian general still 
more conscious of his dependence on brute 
force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the of- 
ficer on duty. 

Balashev took out the packet containing the 
Emperor's letter and laid it on the table (made 
of a door with its hinges still hanging on it, 
laid across two barrels). Davout took the packet 
and read the inscription. 

"You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with 
respect or not," protested Balashev, "but per- 
mit me to observe that I have the honor to be 
adjutant general to His Majesty " 

Davout glanced at him silently and plainly 
derived pleasure from the signs of agitation 
and confusion which appeared on Balashev's 
face. 

"You will be treated as is fitting," said he 



and, putting the packet in his pocket, left the 
shed. 

A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de 
Castres, came in and conducted Balashev to 
the quarters assigned him. 

That day he dined with the marshal, at the 
same board on the barrels. 

Next day Davout rode out early and, after 
asking Balashev to come to him, peremptorily 
requested him to remain there, to move on 
with the baggage train should orders come for 
it to move, and to talk to no one except Mon- 
sieur de Castres. 

After four days of solitude, ennui, and con- 
sciousness of his impotence and insignificance 
particularly acute by contrast with the sphere 
of power in which he had so lately moved 
and after several marches with the marshal's 
baggage and the French army, which occupied 
the whole district, Balashev was brought to Vil- 
na now occupied by the French through the 
very gate by which he had left it four days pre- 
viously. 

Next day the imperial gentleman-in-wait- 
ing, the Comte de Turenne, came to Balashev 
and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon's 
wish to honor him with an audience. 

Four days before, sentinels of the Preobraz- 
hnsk regiment had stood in front of the house 
to which Balashev was conducted, and now 
two French grenadiers stood there in blue uni- 
forms unfastened in front and with shaggy 
caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars 
and Uhlans and a brilliant suite of aides-de- 
camp, pages, and generals, who were waiting 
for Napoleon to come out, were standing at 
the porch, round his saddle horse and his 
Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received Bala- 
shev in the very house in Vflna from which 
Alexander had dispatched him on his mission. 

CHAPTER VI 

THOUGH BALASHEV was used to imperial pomp, 
he was amazed at the luxury and magnificence 
of Napoleon's court. 

The Comte de Turenne showed him into a 
big reception room where many generals, gen- 
tlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates sev- 
eral of whom Balashev had seen at the court of 
the Emperor of Russia were waiting. Duroc 
said that Napoleon would receive the Russian 
general before going for his ride. 

After some minutes, the gentleman-in- 
waiting who was on duty came into the great 
reception room and, bowing politely, asked 
Balashev to follow him. 



BOOK NINE 



35 1 



Balashe'v went into a small reception room, 
one door of which led into a study, the very 
one from which the Russian Emperor had dis- 
patched him on his mission. He stood a minute 
or two, waiting. He heard hurried footsteps 
beyond the door, both halves of it were opened 
rapidly; all was silent and then from the study 
the sound was heard of other steps, firm and 
resolute they were those of Napoleon. He 
had just finished dressing for his ride, and 
wore a blue uniform, opening in front over 
a white waistcoat so long that it covered his 
rotund stomach, white leather breeches tight- 
ly fitting the fat thighs of his short legs, and 
Hessian boots. His short hair had evidently 
just been brushed, but one lock hung down in 
the middle of his broad forehead. His plump 
white neck stood out sharply above the black 
collar of his uniform, and he smelled of Eau 
de Cologne. His full face, rather young-look- 
ing, with its prominent chin, wore a gracious 
and majestic expression of imperial welcome. 

He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step 
and his head slightly thrown back. His whole 
short corpulent figure with broad thick shoul- 
ders, and chest and stomach involuntarily pro- 
truding, had that imposing and stately appear- 
ance one sees in men of forty who live in com- 
fort. It was evident, too, that he was in the best 
of spirits that day. 

He nodded in answer to BalasheVs low and 
respectful bow, and coming up to him at once 
began speaking like a man who values every 
moment of his time and does not condescend 
to prepare what he has to say but is sure he 
will always say the right thing and say it well. 

"Good day, General!" said he. "I have re- 
ceived the letter you brought from the Emper- 
or Alexander and am very glad to see you." 
He glanced with his large eyes into BalasheVs 
face and immediately looked past him. 

It was plain that BalasheVs personality did 
not interest him at all. Evidently only what 
took place within his own mind interested him. 
Nothing outside himself had any significance 
for him, because everything in the world, it 
seemed to him, depended entirely on his will. 

"I do not, and did not, desire war," he con- 
tinued, "but it has been forced on me. Even 
now" (he emphasized the word) "I am ready 
to receive any explanations you can give me." 

And he began clearly and concisely to ex- 
plain his reasons for dissatisfaction with the 
Russian government. Judging by the calmly 
moderate and amicable tone in which the 
French Emperor spoke, Balashev was firmly 



persuaded that he wished for peace and in- 
tended to enter into negotiations. 

When Napoleon, having finished speaking, 
looked inquiringly at the Russian envoy, Bala- 
shev began a speech he had prepared long be- 
fore: "Sire! The Emperor, my master . . ." but 
the sight of the Emperor's eyes bent on him 
confused him. "You are flurried compose 
yourself!" Napoleon seemed to say, as with a 
scarcely perceptible smile he looked at Bala- 
sheVs uniform and sword. 

Balashev recovered himself and began to 
speak. He said that the Emperor Alexander did 
not consider Kurakin's demand for his pass- 
ports a sufficient cause for war; that Kurdkin 
had acted on his own initiative and without 
his sovereign's assent, that the Emperor Alex- 
ander did not desire war, and had no relations 
with England. 

"Not yet!" interposed Napoleon, and, as if 
fearing to give vent to his feelings, he frowned 
and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashev 
might proceed. 

After saying all he had been instructed to 
say, Balashev added that the Emperor Alex- 
ander wished for peace, but would not enter 
into negotiations except on condition that . . . 
Here Balashev hesitated: he remembered the 
words the Emperor Alexander had not writ- 
ten in his letter, but had specially inserted in 
the rescript to Saltyk6v and had told Balashev 
to repeat to Napoleon. Balashev remembered 
these words, "So long as a single armed foe re- 
mains on Russian soil," but some complex feel- 
ing restrained him. He could not utter them, 
though he wished to do so. He grew confused 
and said: "On condition that the French army 
retires beyond the Niemen." * 

Napoleon noticed BalasheVs embarrassment 
when uttering these last words; hfc face twitched 
and the calf of his left leg began to quiver rhyth- 
mically. Without moving from where he stood 
he began speaking in a louder tone and more 
hurriedly than before. During the speech that 
followed, Balashev, who more than once low- 
ered his eyes, involuntarily noticed the quiver- 
ing of Napoleon's left leg which increased the 
more the more Napoleon raised his voice. 

"I desire peace, no less than the Emperor 
Alexander," he began. "Have I not foreighteen 
months been doing everything to obtain it? I 
havewaited eighteen months for explanations. 
But in order to begin negotiations, what is de- 
manded of me?" he said, frowning and making 

1 The Niemen, in 1812, was the frontier between 
Russia and Poland. TR. 



352 WAR AND PEACE 

an energetic gesture of inquiry with his small mencement of the interview. 



white plump hand. 

"The withdrawal of your army beyond the 
Niemen, sire," replied Balashev. 

"The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon. "So 
now you want me to retire beyond the Niemen 
-only the Niemen?" repeated Napoleon, look- 
ing straight at Balashev. 

The latter bowed his head respectfully. 

Instead of the demand of four months earli- 
er to withdraw from Pomerania, only a with- 
drawal beyond the Niemen was now demand- 
ed. Napoleon turned quickly and began to 
pace the room. 

"You say the demand now is that I am to 
withdraw beyond the Niemen before com- 
mencing negotiations, but in just the same way 
two months z^o the demand was that I should 
withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder, 
and yet you are willing to negotiate." 

He went in silence from one corner of the 
room to the other and again stopped in front 
of Balashev. Balashev noticed that his left leg 
was quivering faster than before and his face 
seemed petrified in its stern expression. This 
quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon 
was conscious of. "The vibration of my left calf 
is a great sign with me," he remarked at a later 
date. 

**Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vis- 
tula and Oder may be made to a Prince of Ba- 
den, but not tome!" Napoleon almost screamed, 
quite to his own surprise. "If you gave me Pe- 
tersburg and Moscow I could not accept such 
conditions. You say I have begun this war! But 
who first joined his army? The Emperor Alex- 
ander, not I! And you offer me negotiations 
when I have expended millions, when you are 
in alliance with England, and when your po- 
sition is a bad one. You offer me negotiations! 
But what is the aim of your alliance with Eng- 
land? What has she given you?" he continued 
hurriedly, evidently no longer trying to show 
the advantages of peace and discuss its possibil- 
ity, but only to prove his own rectitude and 
power and Alexander's errors and duplicity. 

The commencement of his speech had ob- 
viously been made with the in tendon of demon- 
strating the advantages of his position and 
showing that he was nevertheless willing to ne- 
gotiate. But he had begun talking, and the 
more he talked the less could he control his 
words. 

The whole purport of his remarks now was 
evidently to exalt himself and insult Alexander 
just what he had least desired at the com- 



"I hear you have made peace with Turkey?" 

Balashev bowed his head affirmatively. 

"Peace has been concluded ..." he began. 

But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evi- 
dently wanted to do all the talking himself, 
and continued to talk with the sort of elo- 
quence and unrestrained irritability to which 
spoiled people are so prone. 

"Yes, I know you have made peace with the 
Turks without obtaining Moldavia and Wal- 
lachia; I would have given your sovereign those 
provinces as I gave him Finland. Yes," he 
went on, "I promised and would have given 
the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Walla- 
chia, and now he won't have those splendid 
provinces. Yet he might have united them to 
his empire and in a single reign would have 
extended Russia from the Gulf of Bothnia to 
the mouths of the Danube. Catherine the Great 
could not have done more," said Napoleon, 
growing more and more excited as he paced 
up and down the room, repeating to Balashtiv 
almost the very words he had used to Alexan- 
der himself at Tilsit. "All that, he would have 
owed to my friendship. Oh, what a splendid 
reign!" he repeated several times, then paused, 
drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox, lifted it 
to his nose, and greedily sniffed at it. 

"What a splendid reign the Emperor Alex- 
ander's might have been!" 

He looked compassionately at Balashev, and 
as soon as the latter tried to make some rejoin- 
der hastily interrupted him. 

"What could he wish or look for that he 
would not have obtained through my friend- 
ship?" demanded Napoleon, shrugging his 
shoulders in perplexity. "But no, he has pre- 
ferred to surround himself with my enemies, 
and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Ben- 
nigsens, and Wintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor 
expelled from his own country; Armfeldt, a 
rake and an intriguer; Wintzingerode, a fugi- 
tive French subject; Bennigsen, rather more of 
a soldier than the others, but all the same an 
incompetent who was unable to do anything 
in 1807 and who should awaken terrible mem- 
ories in the Emperor Alexander's mind. . . . 
Granted that were they competent they might 
be made use of," continued Napoleonhardly 
able to keep pace in words with the rush of 
thoughts that incessantly sprang up, proving 
how right and strong he was (in his perception 
the two were one and the same) "but they are 
not even that! They are neither fit for war nor 
peace! Barclay is said to be the most capable 



BOOK NINE 



353 



of them all, but I cannot say so, judging by his 
first movements. And what are they doing, all 
these courtiers? Pfuel proposes, Armfeldt dis- 
putes, Bennigsen considers, and Barclay, called 
on to act, does not know what to decide on, and 
time passes bringing no result. Bagrati6n alone 
is a military man. He's stupid, but he has ex- 
perience, a quick eye, and resolution. . . . And 
what role is your young monarch playing in 
that monstrous crowd? They compromise him 
and throw on him the responsibility for all 
that happens. A sovereign should not be with 
the army unless he is a general I" said Napole- 
on, evidently uttering these words as a direct 
challenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alex- 
ander desired to be a military commander. 

"The campaign began only a week ago, and 
you haven't even been able to defend Vilna. 
You are cut in two and have been driven out 
of the Polish provinces. Your army is grum- 
bling." 

"On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Bala- 
shev, hardly able to remember what had been 
said to him and following these verbal fireworks 
with difficulty, "the troops are burning with 
eagerness . . ." 

"I know everything!" Napoleon interrupted 
him. "I know everything. I know the number 
of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. 
You have not two hundred thousand men, and 
I have three times that number. I give you my 
word of honpr/'said Napoleon, forgetting that 
his word of honor could carry no weight "I 
give you my word of honor that I have five hun- 
dred and thirty thousand men this side of the 
Vistula. The Turks will be of no use to you; 
they are worth nothing and have shown it by 
making peace with you. As for the Swedes it is 
their fate to be governed by mad kings. Their 
king was insane and they changed him for an- 
other Bernadotte, who promptly went mad 
for no Swede would ally himself with Russia 
unless he were mad." 

Napoleon grinned maliciously and again 
raised his snuffbox to his nose. 

Balashev knew how to reply to each of Na- 
poleon's remarks, and would have done so; he 
continually made the gesture of a man wishing 
to say something, but Napoleon always inter- 
rupted him. To the alleged insanity of the 
Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that when 
Russia is on her side Sweden is practically an 
island: but Napoleon gave an angry exclama- 
tion to drown his voice. Napoleon was in that 
state of irritability in which a man has to talk, 
talk, and talk, merely to convince himself that 



he is -in the right. Balashev began to feel un- 
comfortable: as envoy he feared to demean his 
dignity and felt the necessity of replying; but, 
as a man, he shrank before the transport of 
groundless wrath that had evidently seized Na- 
poleon. He knew that none of the words now 
uttered by Napoleon had any significance, and 
that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of 
them when he came to his senses. Balashev 
stood with downcast eyes, looking at the move- 
ments of Napoleon's stout legs and trying to 
avoid meeting his eyes. 

"But what do I care about your allies?" said 
Napoleon. "I have allies the Poles. There are 
eighty thousand of them and they fight like 
lions. And there will be two hundred thousand 
of them." 

And probably still more perturbed by the 
fact that he had uttered this obvious falsehood, 
and that Balashev still stood silently before 
him in the same attitude of submission to fate, 
Napoleon abruptly turned round, drew close 
to Balashev's face, and, gesticulating rapidly 
and energetically with his white hands, almost 
shouted: 

"Know that if you stir up Prussia against me, 
I'll wipe it off the map of Europe!" hedeclared, 
his face pale and distorted by anger, and he 
struck one of hissmall hands energetically with 
the other. "Yes, I will throw you back beyond 
the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and will 
re-erect against you that barrier * which it was 
criminal and blind of Europe to allow to be de- 
stroyed. Yes, that is what will happen to you. 
That is what you have gained by alienating 
me!" And he walked silently several times up 
and down the room, his fat shoulders twitch- 
ing. 

He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pock- 
et, took it out again, lifted it several times to 
his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev. He 
paused, looked ironically straight into Bala- 
sheVs eyes, and said in a quiet voice: 

"And yet what a splendid reign your master 
might have had!" 

Balashev, feeling it incumbent on him to re- 
ply, said that from the Russian side things did 
not appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleon was 
silent, still looking derisively at him and evi- 
dently not listening to him. Balashev said that 
in Russia the best results were expected from 
the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as 
if to say, "I know it's your duty to say that, but 
you don't believe it yourself. I have convinced 
you." 

1 Namely, a large Polish state. TR. 



354 



WAR AND PEACE 



When Balashev had ended, Napoleon again 
took out his snuffbox, sniffed at it, and stamped 
his foot twice on the floor as a signal. The door 
opened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending re- 
spectfully, handed the Emperor his hat and 
gloves; another brought him a pocket handker- 
chief. Napoleon, without giving them a glance, 
turned to Balashev: 

"Assure the Emperor Alexander from me," 
said he, taking his hat, "that I am as devoted 
to him as before: I know him thoroughly and 
very highly esteem his lofty qualities. I will de- 
tain you no longer, General; you shall receive 
my letter to the Emperor." 

And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Ev- 
eryone in the reception room rushed forward 
and descended the staircase. 



VII 

AFTER ALL THAT Napoleon had said to him 
those bursts of anger and the last dryly spoken 
words: "I will detain you no longer, General; 
you shall receive my letter," Balashev felt con- 
vinced that Napoleon would not wish to see 
him, and would even avoid another meeting 
with him an insulted envoy especially as he 
had witnessed his unseemly anger. But, to his 
surprise, Balashev received, through Duroc, an 
invitation to dine with the Emperor that day. 

Bessi&amp;res, Caulaincourt, and Berthier were 
present at that dinner. 

Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and ami- 
ably. He not only showed no sign of constraint 
or self-reproach on account of his outburst that 
morning, but, on the contrary, tried to reas- 
sure Balashev. It was evident that he had long 
been convinced that it was impossible for him 
to make a mistake, and that in his perception 
whatever he did was right, not because it har- 
monized with any idea of right and wrong, but 
because he did it. 

The Emperor was in very good spirits after 
his ride through Vilna, where crowds of peo- 
ple had rapturously greeted and followed him. 
From all the windows of the streets through 
which he rode, rugs, flags, and his monogram 
were displayed, and the Polish ladies, welcom- 
ing him, waved their handkerchiefs to him. 

At dinner, having placed Balashev beside 
him, Napoleon not only treated him amiably 
but behaved as if Balashev were one of his own 
courtiers, one of those who sympathized with 
his plans and ought to rejoice at his success. In 
the course of conversation he mentioned Mos- 
cow and questioned Balashev about the Rus- 
sian capital, not merely as an interested trav- 



eler asks about a new city he intends to visit, 
but as if convinced that Balashev, as a Russian, 
must be flattered by his curiosity. 

"How many inhabitants are there in Mos- 
cow? How many houses? Is it true that Moscow 
is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches 
are there in Moscow?" he asked. 

And receiving the reply that there were more 
than two hundred churches, he remarked: 

"Why such a quantity of churches?" 

"The Russians are very devout," replied Bal- 
ashev. 

"But a large number of monasteries and 
churches is always a sign of the backwardness 
of a people," said Napoleon, turning to Cau- 
laincourt for appreciation of this remark. 

Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree 
with the French Emperor. 

"Every country has its own character," said 
he. 

"But nowhere in Europe is there anything 
like that," said Napoleon. 

"I beg Your Majesty's pardon," returned Bal- 
ashev, "besides Russia there is Spain, where 
there are also many churches and monasteries." 

This reply of BalasheVs, which hinted at the 
recent defeats of the French in Spain, was 
much appreciated when he related it at Alex- 
ander's court, but it was not much appreciated 
at Napoleon's dinner, where it passed unno- 
ticed. 

The uninterested and perplexed faces of 
the marshals showed that they were puzzled as 
to what BalasheVs tone suggested. "If there is 
a point we don't see it, or it is not at all witty," 
their expressions seemed to say. So little was 
his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did 
not notice it at all and naively asked Balashev 
through what towns the direct road from there 
to Moscow passed. Balashev, who was on the 
alert all through the dinner, replied that just 
as "all roads lead to Rome," so all roads lead 
to Moscow: there were many roads, and "among 
them the road through Poltdva, which Charles 
XII chose." Balashev involuntarily flushed 
with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply, but 
hardly had he uttered the word Poltdva before 
Caulaincourt began speaking of the badness of 
the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of 
his Petersburg reminiscences. 

After dinner they went to drink coffee in Na- 
poleon's study, which four days previously had 
been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napole- 
on sat down, toying with his S&amp;vres coffee cup, 
and motioned Balashev to a chair beside him. 

Napoleon was in that well-known after-din- 



BOOK NINE 



S55 



ner mood which, more than any reasoned cause, 
makes a man contented with himself and dis- 
posed to consider everyone his friend. Itseemed 
to him that he was surrounded by men who 
adored him: and he felt convinced that, after 
his dinner, Balashev too was his friend and wor- 
shiper. Napoleon turned to him with a pleas- 
ant, though slightly ironic, smile. 

"They tell me this is the room the Emperor 
Alexander occupied? Strange, isn't it, Gener- 
al?" he said, evidently not doubting that this 
remark would be agreeable to his hearer since 
it went to prove his, Napoleon's, superiority to 
Alexander. 

Balashev could make no reply and bowed his 
head in silence. 

"Yes. Four days ago in this room, Wintzing- 
erode and Stein were deliberating," continued 
Napoleon with the same derisive and self-con- 
fident smile. "What I can't understand," he 
went on, "is that the Emperor Alexander has 
surrounded himself with my personal enemies. 
That I do not . . . understand. Has he not 
thought that I may do thesame?"and he turned 
inquiringly to Balashev, and evidently this 
thought turned him back on to the track of his 
morning's anger, which was still fresh in him. 

"And let him know that I will do sol" said 
Napoleon, rising and pushing his cup away 
with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wiirttemberg, 
Baden, and Weimar relations out of Germany. 
. . . Yes. I'll drive them out. Let him prepare 
an asylum for them in Russial" 

Balashev bowed his head with an air indicat- 
ing that he would like to make his bow and 
leave, and only listened because he could not 
help hearing what was said to him. Napoleon 
did not notice this expression; he treated Bal- 
ashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a 
man now fully devoted to him and who must 
rejoice at his former master's humiliation. 

"And why has the Emperor Alexander taken 
command of the armies? What is the good of 
that? War is my profession, but his business is 
to reign and not to command armies 1 Why has 
he taken on himself such a responsibility?" 

Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, 
paced several times up and down the room in 
silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly, 
went up to Balashev and with a slight smile, as 
confidently, quickly, and simply as if he were 
doing something not merely important but 
pleasing to Balashev, he raised his hand to the 
forty-year-old Russian general's face and, tak- 
ing him by the ear, pulled it gently, smiling 
with his lips only. 



To have one's ear pulled by the Emperor 
was considered the greatest honor and mark of 
favor at the French court. 

"Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor 
Alexander, why don't you say anything?" said 
he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, to be 
the adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, 
Napoleon. "Are the horses ready for the gener- 
al?" he added, with a slight inclination of 
his head in reply to BalasheVs bow. "Let him 
have mine, he has a long way to go/" 

The letter taken by Balashev was the last 
Napoleon sent to Alexander. Every detail of 
the interview was communicated to the Rus- 
sian monarch, and the war began. . . . 

CHAPTER VIII 

AFTER HIS INTERVIEW with Pierre in Moscow, 
Prince Andrew went to Petersburg, on business 
as he told his family, bufirdrtTy^^eet Ana- 
tole Kurdgin whom he felt it necessary to en- 
counter. On reaching Petersburg he inquired 
for Kuragin but the latter had already left the 
city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that 
Prince Andrew was on his track. Anatole Kura- 
gin promptly obtained an appointment from 
the Minister of War and went to join the army 
in Moldavia. While in Petersburg Prince An- 
drew met Kutiizov, his former commander who 
was always well disposed toward him, and Ku- 
tiizov suggested that he should accompany him 
to the army in Moldavia, to which the old gen- 
eral had been appointed commander in chief. 
So Prince Andrew, having received an appoint- 
ment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey. 
Prince Andrew did not think it proper to 
write and challenge Kurdgin. He thought that 
if he challenged him without some fresh cause 
it might compromise the young Countess Ros- 
t6va and so he wanted to meet Kurdgin per- 
sonally in order to find a fresh pretext for a 
duel. But he again failed to meet Kuragin in 
Turkey, for soon after Prince Andrew arrived, 
the latter re turned to Russia. In a new country, 
amid new conditions, Prince Andrew found 
life easier to bear. After his betrothed had brok- 
en faith with him which he felt the more a- 
cutely the more he tried to conceal its effects 
the surroundings in which he had been happy 
became trying to him, and the freedom and in- 
dependence he had once prized so highly were 
still more so. Not only could he no longer think 
the thoughts that had first come to him as he 
lay gazing at the sky on the field of Austerlitz 
and had later enlarged upon with Pierre, and 
which had filled his solitude at Boguchdrovo 



356 



WAR AND PEACE 



and then in Switzerland and Rome, but he 
even dreaded to recall them and the bright and 
boundless horizons they had revealed. He was 
now concerned only with the nearest practical 
matters unrelated to his past interests, and he 
seized on these the more eagerly the more those 
past interests were closed to him. It was as if 
that lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had 
once towered above him had suddenly turned 
into a low, solid vault that weighed him down, 
in which all was clear, but nothing eternal or 
mysterious. 

Of the activities that presented themselves to 
him, army service was the simplest and most 
familiar. As a general on duty on Kutuzov's 
staff, he applied himself to business with zeal 
and perseverance and surprised Kutiizov by his 
willingness and accuracy in work. Not having 
found KurAgin in Turkey, Prince Andrew did 
not thinkJj^Q^x^iK to rush back to Russia 
after him, but all the sime he knew that how- 
ever long it might be before he met Kur&amp;gin, 
despite his contempt for him and despite all 
the proofs he deduced to convince himself that 
it was not worth stooping to a conflict with him 
he knew that when he did meet him he would 
not be able to resist calling him out, any more 
than a ravenous man can help snatching at 
food. And the consciousness that the insult was 
not yet avenged, that his rancor was still un- 
spent, weighed on his heart and poisoned the 
artificial tranquillity which he managed to ob- 
tain in Turkey by means of restless, plodding, 
and rather vainglorious and ambitious activity. 

I n the year 1812, when news of the war with 
Napoleon reached Bucharest where Kutu/ov 
had been living for two months, passing his 
days and nights with a Wallachian woman- 
Prince Andrew asked Kutiizov to transfer him 
to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was al- 
ready weary of Bolk6nski's activity which 
seemed to reproach his own idleness, very read- 
ily let him go and gave him a mission to Bar- 
clay de Tolly. 

Before joining the Western Army which was 
then, in May, encamped at Drissa, Prince An- 
drew visited Bald Hills which was directly on 
his way, being only two miles off the Smolensk 
highroad. During the last three years there had 
been so many changes in his life, he had thought, 
felt, and seen so much (having traveled both 
in the east and the west), that on reaching Bald 
Hills it struck him as strange and unexpected 
to find the way of life there unchanged and still 
the same in every detail. He entered through 
the gates with their stone pillars and drove up 



the avenue leading to the house as if he were 
entering an enchanted, sleeping castle. The 
same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, the 
same stillness reigned there, and inside there 
was the same furniture, the same walls, sounds, 
and smell, and the same timid faces, only some- 
what older. Princess Mary was still the same tim- 
id, plain maiden getting on in years, uselessly 
and joylessly passing the bestyearsof her life in 
fearand constant suffering. Mademoiselle Bou- 
rienne was the same coquettish, self-satisfied 
girl, enjoying every moment of her existence 
and full of joyous hopes for the future. She 
had merely become more self-confident, Prince 
Andrew thought. Dessalles, the tutor he had 
brought from Switzerland, was wearing a coat 
of Russian cut and talking broken Russian to 
the servants, but was still the same narrowly in- 
telligent, conscientious, and pedantic precep- 
tor. The old prince had changed in appearance 
only by the loss of a tooth, which left a notice- 
able gap on one side of his mouth; in character 
he was the same as ever, only showing still more 
irritability and skepticism as to what was hap- 
pening in the world. Little Nicholas alone had 
changed. He had grown, become rosier, had 
curly dark hair, and, when merry and laugh- 
ing, quite unconsciously lifted the upper lip 
of his pretty little mouth just as the little prin- 
cess used to do. He alone did not obey the law 
of immutability in the enchanted, sleeping cas- 
tle. But though externally all remained as of 
old, the inner relations of all these people had 
changed since Prince Andrew had seen them 
last. The household was divided into two alien 
and hostile camps, who changed their habits 
for his sake and only met because he was there. 
To the one camp belonged the old prince, Mad- 
moiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the 
other Princess Mary, Dessalles, little Nicholas, 
and all the old nurses and maids. 

During his stay at Bald Hills all the family 
dined together, but they were ill at ease and 
Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for 
whose sake an exception was being made and 
that his presence made them all feel awkward. 
Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the 
first day, he was taciturn, and the old prince 
noticing this also became morosely dumb and 
retired to his apartments directly after dinner. 
In the evening, when Prince Andrew went to 
him and, trying to rouse him, began to tell 
him of the young Count Kmensky's campaign, 
the old prince began unexpectedly to talk 
about Princess Mary, blaming her for her 
superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle 



BOOK 

Bourienne, who, he said, was the only person 
really attached to him. 

The old prince said that if he was ill it was 
only because of Princess Mary: that she pur- 
posely worried and irritated him, and that by 
indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little 
Prince Nicholas. The old prince knew very well 
that he tormented his daughter and that her 
life was very hard, but he also knew that he 
could not help tormenting her and that she de- 
served it. "Why does Prince Andrew, who sees 
this, say nothing to me about his sister? Docs 
he think me a scoundrel, or an old fool who, 
without any reason, keeps his own daughter at 
a distance and attaches this Frenchwoman to 
himself? He doesn't understand, so I must ex- 
plain it, and hemust hearme out," thought the 
old prince. And he began explaining why he 
could not put up with his daughter's unreason- 
able character. 

"If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, with- 
out looking up (he was censuring his father 
for the first time in his life), "I did not wish to 
speak about it, but as you ask me 1 will give 
you niy frank opinion. If there is any misun- 
derstanding a nd discord between you a nd Mary-, 
I can't blame her for it at all. 1 know how she 
loves and respects you. Since you ask me," 
continued Prince Andrew, becoming irritable 
as he was always liable to do of late "I can 
only say that if there are any misunderstand- 
ings they are caused by that worthless woman, 
who is not fit to be my sister's companion." 

The old man at first stared fixedly at his son, 
and an unnatural smile disclosed the fresh gap 
between his teeth to which Prince Andrew 
could not get accustomed. 

"What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You've 
already been talking it over! Eh?" 

"Father, I did not want to judge," said 
Prince Andrew, in a hard and bitter tone, "but 
you challenged me, and I have said, and always 
shall say, that Mary is not to blame, but Ihose 
to blamethe one to blame is that French- 
woman." 

"Ah, he has passed judgment . . . passed judg- 
ment!" said the old man in a low voice and, as 
it seemed to Prince Andrew, with some embar- 
rassment, but then he suddenly jumped up and 
cried: "Be off, be off! Let not a trace of you re- 
main here! . . ." 

Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but 
Princess Mary persuaded him to stay another 
day. That day he did not see his father, who 
did not leave his room and admitted no one 



NINE 357 

but Mademoiselle Bourienne and Tikhon, but 
asked several times whether his son had gone. 
Next day, before leaving, Prince Andrew went 
to his son's rooms. The boy, curly-headed like 
his mother and glowing with health, sat on his 
knee, and Prince Andrew began telling him 
the story of Bluebeard, but fell into a reverie 
without finishing the story. He thought not of 
this pretty child, his son whom he held on his 
knee, but of himself. He sought in himself ei- 
ther remorse for having angered his father or 
regret at leaving home for the first time in his 
life on bad terms with him, and was horrified 
to find neither. What meant still more to him 
was that he sought and did not find in himself 
the former tenderness for his son which he had 
hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and 
taking him on his knee. 

"Well, go on!" said r .VstfnjiiowiL 

Prince Andrew, witnout replyirfgV put him 
down from his knee and went out of the room. 

As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his 
daily occupations, and especially on returning 
to the old conditions of life amid which he had 
been happy, weariness of life overcame him 
with its former intensity, and he hastened to 
escape from these memories and to find some 
work as soon as possible. 

"So you've decided to go, Andrew?" asked 
his sister. 

"Thank God that I can," replied Prince An- 
drew. "1 am very sorry you can't." 

"Why do you say that?" replied Princess 
Mary. "Why do you say that, when you are go- 
ing to this terrible war, and he is so old? Made- 
moiselle Bourienne says he has been asking 
about you. ..." 

As soon as she began to speak of that, her 
lips trembled and her tears began to fall. Prince 
Andrew turned away and began pacing the 
room. 

"Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks 
who and what what trash can cause people 
misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed 
Princess Mary. 

She understood that when speakingof "trash" 
he referred not only to Mademoiselle Bouri- 
enne, the cause of her misery, but also to the 
man who had ruined his own happiness. 

"Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" 
she said, touching his elbow and looking at 
him with eyes that shone through her tears. "1 
understand you" (she looked down). "Don't 
imagine that sorrow is the work of men. Meri 
are His tools." She looked a little above Prince 
Andrew's head with the confident, accustomed 



WAR AND PEACE 



look with which one looks at the place where 
a familiar portrait hangs. "Sorrow is sent by 
Him, not by men. Men are His instruments, 
they are not to blame. II you think someone 
has wronged you, forget it and forgivel We 
have no right to punish. And then you will 
know the happiness of forgiving." 

"If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. 
That is a woman's virtue. But a man should 
not and cannot forgive and forget," he replied, 
and though till that moment he had not been 
thinking of Kuragin, all his unexpended anger 
suddenly swelled up in his heart. 

"If Mary is already persuading me to forgive, 
it means that I ought longago to have punished 
him," he thought. And giving her no further 
reply, he began thinking of the glad vindictive 
moment when he would meet Kuriigin who he 
knew y^ *w-'*&gt; fee ^my. 

PrincciVMary beggecj him to stay one day 
more, saying that she kil*w how unhappy her 
father would be if AndreV left without being 
reconciled to him, but Prince Andrew replied 
that he would probably soon be back again 
from the army and would certainly write to his 
father, but that the longer he stayed now the 
more embittered their differences would be- 
come. 

"Good-by, Andrew! Remember that misfor- 
tunes come from God, and men are never to 
blame," were the last words he heard from his 
sister when he took leave of her. 

"Then it must be so!" thought Prince An- 
drew as he drove out of the avenue from the 
house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent crea- 
ture, is left to be victimized by an old man who 
has outlived his wits. The old man feels he is 
guilty, but cannot change himself. My boy is 
growing up and rejoices in life, in which like 
everybody else he will deceive or be deceived. 
And I am off to the army. Why? I myself don't 
know. I want to meet that man whom I despise, 
so as to give him a chance to kill and laugh at 
me!" 

These conditions of life had been the same 
before, but then they were all connected, while 
now they had all tumbled to pieces. Only 
senseless things, lacking coherence, presented 
themselves one after another to Prince An- 
drew's mind. 

CHAPTER IX 

PRINCE ANDREW reached the general headquar- 
ters of the army at the end of June. The first 
army, with which was the Emperor, occupied 
the fortified camp at Drissa; the second army 



was retreating, trying to effect a junction with 
the first one from which it was said to be cut off 
by large French forces. Everyone was dissatis- 
fied with the general course of affairs in the 
Russian army, but no one anticipated any dan- 
ger of invasion of the Russian provinces, and 
no one thought the war would extend farther 
than the western, the Polish, provinces. 

Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to 
whom he had been assigned, on the bank of 
the Drissa. As there was not a single town or 
large village in the vicinity of the camp, the 
immense number ot generals and courtiers ac- 
companying the army were living in the best 
houses of the villages on both sides of the river, 
over a radius of six miles. Barclay de Tolly was 
quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor. 
He received Bolkonski stiflly and coldly and 
told him in his foreign accent that he would 
mention him to the Emperor for a decision as 
to his employment, but asked him meanwhile to 
remain on his staff. Anatole Kuragin, whom 
Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the ar- 
my, was not there. He had gone to Petersburg, 
but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this. His 
mind was occupied by the interests of the cen- 
ter that was conducting a gigantic war, and he 
was glad to be free for a while from the distrac- 
tion caused by the thought of Kuragin. Dur- 
ing the first four days, while no duties were re- 
quired of him, Prince Andrew rode round the 
whole fortified camp and, by the aid of his own 
knowledge and by talks with experts, tried to 
form a definite opinion about it. But the ques- 
tion whether the camp was advantageous or 
disadvantageous remained for him undecided. 
Already from his military experience and what 
he had seen in the Austrian campaign, he had 
come to the conclusion that in war the most 
deeply considered plans have no significance 
and that all depends on the way unexpected 
movements of the enemy that cannot be fore- 
seenare met, and on how and by whom the 
whole matter is handled. To clear up this last 
point for hiiqself, Prince Andrew, utilizing his 
position and acquaintances, tried to fathom 
the character of the control of the army arid of 
the men and parties engaged in it, and he de- 
duced for himself the following idea of the state 
of affairs. 

While the Emperor had still been at Vflna, 
the forces had been divided into three armies. 
First, the army under Barclay de Tolly, second- 
ly, the army under Bagrati6n, and thirdly, the 
one commanded by Tormdsov. The Emperor 
was with the first army, but not as commander 



BOOK NINE 



359 



in chief. In the orders issued it was stated, not 
that the Emperor would take command, but 
only that he would be with the army. The Em- 
peror, moreover, had with him not a command- 
er in chief's staff but the imperial headquarters 
staff. In attendance on him was the head of the 
imperial staff, Quartermaster General Prince 
Volkonski, as well as generals, imperial aides- 
de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large num- 
ber of foreigners, but not the army staff. 
Besides these, there were in attendance on the 
Emperor without any definite appointments: 
Arakch^ev, the ex-Minister of War; Count Bcn- 
nigsen, the senior general in rank; the Grand 
DukeTsard-vich Constantine Pavlovich; Count 
Rumydntsev, the Chancellor; Stein, a former 
Prussian minister; Armfeldt, a Swedish gener- 
al; Pfuel, the chief author of the plan of cam- 
paign; Paulucci, an adjutant general and Sar- 
dinian emigrd; Wolzogen and many others. 
Though these men had no military appoint- 
ment in the army, their position gave them in- 
fluence, and often a corps commander, or even 
the commander in chief, did not know in what 
capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the 
Grand Duke, Arakchdev, or Prince Volkonski, 
or was given this or that advice and did not know 
whether a certain order received in the form of 
advice emanated from the man who gave it or 
from the Emperor and whether it had to be ex- 
ecuted or not. But this was only the external 
condition; the essential significance of the 
presence of the Emperor and of all these peo- 
ple, from a courtier's point of view (and in an 
Emperor's vicinity all became courtiers), was 
clear to everyone. It was this: the Emperor did 
not assume the title of commander in chief, but 
disposed of all the armies; the men around him 
were his assistants. Arakch^ev was a faithful 
custodian to enforce order and acted as the sov- 
ereign's bodyguard. Bennigsen was a landlord 
in the Vilna province who appeared to be do- 
ing the honors of the district, but was in real- 
ity a good general, useful as an adviser and 
ready at hand to replace Barclay. The Grand 
Duke was there because it suited him to be. The 
ex-Minister Stein was there because his advice 
was useful and the Emperor Alexander held 
him in high esteem personally. Armfeldt viru- 
lently hated Napoleon and was a general full 
of self-confidence, a quality that always influ- 
enced Alexander. Paulucci was there because 
he was bold and decided in speech. The adju- 
tants general were there because they always 
accompanied the Emperor, and lastly and chief- 
ly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up 



the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, 
having induced Alexander to believe in the 
efficacy of that plan, was directing the whole 
business of the war. With Pfuel was Wolzogen, 
who expressed Pfuel's thoughts in a more com- 
prehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was 
a harsh, bookish theorist, self-confident to the 
point of despising everyone else) was able to 
do. 

Besides these Russians and foreigners who 
propounded new and unexpected ideas every 
day especially the foreigners, who did so with 
a boldness characteristic of people employed in 
a country not their own there were many sec- 
ondary personages accompanying the army be- 
cause their principals were there. 

Among the opinions and voices in this im- 
mense, restless, brilliant, and proud sphere, 
Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply 
defined subdivisions of tendencies and parties: 

The first party consisted of Pfuel and his ad- 
herentsmilitary theorists who believed in a 
science of war with immutable laws laws of 
oblique movements, outflankings, and so forth. 
Pfuel and hisadherentsdemanded a retirement 
into the depths of the country in accordance 
with precise laws defined by a pseudo-theory 
of war, and they saw only barbarism, ignorance, 
or evil intention in every deviation from that 
theory. To this party belonged the foreign no- 
bles, Wolzogen, Wintzingerode, and others, 
chiefly Germans. 

The second party was directly opposed to the 
first; one extreme, as always happens, was met 
by representatives of the other. The members 
of this party were those who had demanded an 
advance from Vilna into Poland and freedom 
from all prearranged plans. Besides being ad- 
vocates ot bold action, this section also repre- 
sented nationalism, which made them still more 
one-sided in the dispute. They were Russians: 
Bagration, Ermolov (who was beginning to 
come to the front), and others. At that time a 
famous joke of Erm61ov's was being circulated, 
that as a great favor he had petitioned the Em- 
peror to make him a German. The men of that 
party, remembering Suv6rov, said that what 
one had to do was not to reason, or stick pins 
into maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep 
him out of Russia, and not let the army get dis- 
couraged. 

To the third party in which the Emperor 
had most confidence belonged the courtiers 
who tried to arrange compromises between the 
other two. The members of this party, chiefly 
civilians and to whom Arakche'ev belonged, 



WAR AND PEACE 



thought and said what men who have no con- 
victions but wish to seem to have some gener- 
ally say. They said that undoubtedly war, par- 
ticularly against such a genius as Bonaparte 
(they called him Bonaparte now), needs most 
deeply devised plans and profound scientific 
knowledge and in that respect Pfuel was a 
genius, but at the same time it had to be ac- 
knowledged that the theorists are often one- 
sided, and therefore one should not trust them 
absolutely, but should also listen to what Pfuel's 
opponents and practical men of experience in 
warfare had to say, and then choose a middle 
course. They insisted on the retention of the 
camp at Drissa, according to Pfuel's plan, but 
on changing the movements of the other ar- 
mies. Though, by this course, neither one aim 
nor the other could be attained, yet it seemed 
best to the adherents of this third party. 

Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous 
representative was the Tsar^vich, who could 
not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz, 
where he had ridden out at the head of the 
Guards, in his casque and cavalry uniform as to 
a review, expecting to crush the French gal- 
lantly; but unexpectedly finding himself in the 
front line had narrowly escaped amid the gen- 
eral confusion. The men of this party had both 
the quality and the defect of frankness in their 
opinions. They feared Napoleon, recognized 
his strength and their own weakness, and frank- 
ly said so. They said: "Nothing but sorrow, 
shame, and ruin will come of all this! We have 
abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall aban- 
don Drissa. The only reasonable thing left to 
do is to conclude peace as soon as possible, be- 
fore we are turned out of Petersburg.'* 

This view was very general in the upper ar- 
my circles and found support also in Peters- 
burg and from the chancellor, Rumydntsev, 
who, for other reasons of state, was in favor of 
peace. 

The fifth party consisted of those who were 
adherents of Barclay de Tolly, not so much as 
a man but as minister of war and commander 
in chief. "Be he what he may" (they always be- 
gan like that), "he is an honest, practical man 
and we have nobody better. Give him real 
power, for war cannot be conducted success- 
fully without unity of command, and he will 
show what he can do, as he did in Finland. 
If our army is well organized and strong 
and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffer- 
ing any defeats, we owe this entirely to Bar- 
clay. If Barclay is now to be superseded by 
Bennigsen all will be lost, for Bennigsen 



showed his incapacity already in 1807." 

The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on 
the contrary, that at any rate there was no one 
more active and experienced than Bennigsen: 
"and twist about as you may, you will have to 
come to Bennigsen eventually. Let the others 
make mistakes now ! " said they, arguing that our 
retirement to Drissa was a most shameful re- 
verse and an unbroken series of blunders. "The 
more mistakes that are made the better. It will 
at any rate be understood all the sooner that 
things cannot go on like this. What is wanted 
is not some Barclay or other, but a man like 
Bennigsen, who made his mark in 1807, and to 
whom Napoleon himself did justice a man 
whose authority would be willingly recognized, 
and Bennigsen is the only such man." 

The seventh party consisted of the sort of 
people who are always to be found, especially 
around young sovereigns, and of whom there 
were particularly many round Alexander gen- 
erals and imperial aides-de-camp passionately 
devoted to the Emperor, not merely as a mon- 
arch but as a man, adoring him sincerely and 
disinterestedly, as Rost6v had done in 1805, 
and who saw in him not only all the virtues 
but all human capabilities as well. These men, 
though enchanted with the sovereign for refus- 
ing the command of the army, yet blamed him 
for such excessive modesty, and only desired 
and insisted that their adored sovereign should 
abandon his diffidence and openly announce 
that he would place himself at the head of the 
army, gather round him a commander in chiefs 
staff, and, consulting experienced theoreticians 
and practical men where necessary, would him- 
self lead the troops, whose spirits would there- 
by be raised to the highest pitch. 

The eighth and largest group, which in its 
enormous numbers was to the others as ninety- 
nine to one, consisted of men who desired nei- 
ther peace nor war, neither an advance nor a 
defensive camp at the Drissa or anywhere else, 
neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel 
nor Bennigsen, but only the one most essential 
thing as much advantage and pleasure for 
themselves as possible. In the troubled waters 
of conflicting and intersecting intrigues that 
eddied about the Emperor's headquarters, it 
was possible to succeed in many ways unthink- 
able at other times. A man who simply wished 
to retain his lucrative post would today agree 
with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and 
the day after, merely to avoid responsibility or 
to please the Emperor, would declare that he 
had no opinion at all on the matter. Another 



BOOK 

who wished to gain some advantage would &amp;- 
tract the Emperor's attention by loudly acfvo- 
cating the very thing the Emperor had hinted 
at the day before, and would dispute and shout 
at the council, beating his breast and challeng- 
ing those who did not agree with him to duels, 
thereby proving that he was prepared to sac- 
rifice himself for the common good. A third, 
in the absence of opponents, between two coun- 
cils would simply solicit a Special gratuity for 
his faithful services, well knowing that at that 
moment people would be too busy to refuse 
him. A fourth while seemingly overwhelmed 
with work would often come accidentally un- 
der the Emperor's eye. A fifth, to achieve his 
long-cherished aim of dining with the Emper- 
or, would stubbornly insist on the correctness 
or falsity of some newly emerging opinion and 
for this object would produce arguments more 
or less forcible and correct. 

All the men of this party were fishing for 
rubles, decorations, and promotions, and in 
this pursuit watched only the weathercock of 
imperial favor, and directly they noticed it 
turning in any direction, this whole drone pop- 
ulation of the army began blowing hard that 
way, so that it was all the harder for the Em- 
peror to turn it elsewhere. Amid the uncer- 
tainties of the position, with the menace of 
serious danger giving a peculiarly threaten- 
ing character to everything, amid this vortex of 
intrigue, egotism, conflict of views and feelings, 
and the diversity of race among these people- 
tins eighth and largest party of those preoccu- 
pied with personal interests imparted great 
confusion and obscurity to the common task. 
Whatever question arose, a swarm of these 
drones, without having finished their buzzing 
on a previous theme, flew over to the new one 
and by their hum drowned and obscured the 
voices of those who were disputing honestly. 

From among all these parties, just at the 
time Prince Andrew reached the army, another, 
a ninth party, was being formed and was be- 
ginning to raise its voice. This was the party of 
the elders, reasonable men experienced and 
capable in state affairs, who, without sharing 
any of those conflicting opinions, were able to 
take a detached view of what was gong on at 
the staff at headquarters and to consider means 
of escape from this muddle, indecision, intrica- 
cy, and weakness. 

The men of this party said and thought that 
what was wrong resulted chiefly from the Em- 
peror's presence in the army with his military 
court and from the consequent presence there 



NINE 361 

of a-n indefinite, conditional, and unsteady fluc- 
tuation of relations, which is in place at court 
but harmful in an army; that a sovereign should 
reign but not command the army, and that the 
only way out of the position would be for the 
Emperor and his court to leave the army; that 
the mere presence of the Emperor paralyzed 
the action of fifty thousand men required to 
secure his personal safety, and that the worst 
commander in chief if independent would be 
better than the very best one trammeled by the 
presence and authority of the monarch. 

Just at the time Prince Andrew was living 
unoccupied at Drissa, Shishk6v, the Secretary 
of State and one of the chief representatives of 
this party, wrote a letter to the Emperor which 
Arakche"ev and Balashev agreed to sign. In this 
letter, availing himself of permission given 
him by the Emperor to discuss the general 
course of affairs, he respectfully suggested on 
the plea that it was necessary for the sovereign 
to arouse a warlike spirit in the people of 
the capital that the Emperor should leave the 
army. 

That arousing of the people by their sov- 
ereign and his call to them to defend their 
country the very incitement which was the 
chief cause of Russia's triumph in so far as it 
was produced by the Tsar's personal presence 
in Moscow was suggested to the Emperor, and 
accepted by him, as a pretext for quitting the 
army. 

CHAPTER X 

THIS LETTER had not yet been presented to the 
Emperor when Barclay, one day at dinner, in- 
formed Bolk6nski that the sovereign wished to 
see him personally, to question him about 
Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was to pre- 
sent himself at Bennigsen's quarters at six that 
evening. 

News was received at the Emperor's quarters 
that very day of a fresh movement by Napo- 
leon which might endanger the army news 
subsequently found to be false. And that morn- 
ing Colonel Michaud had ridden round the 
Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had 
pointed out to him that this fortified camp 
constructed by Pfuel, and till then considered 
a chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which would 
ensure Napoleon's destruction, was an absurd- 
ity, threatening the destruction of the Russian 
army. 

Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen's quar- 
tersa country gentleman's house of moderate 
size, situated on the very banks of the river, 



36* WAR AND PEACE 

Neither Bennigsen nor the Emperor was there, 
but Chernyshev, the Emperor's aide-de-camp, 
received Bolk6nski and informed him that the 
Emperor, accompanied by General Bennigsen 
and Marquis Paulucci, had gone a second time 
that day to inspect the fortifications of the 
Drissa camp, of the suitability of which serious 
doubts were beginning to be felt. 

Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the 
first room with a French novel in his hand. 
This room had probably been a music room; 
there was still an organ in it on which some 
rugs were piled, and in one corner stood the 
folding Bedstead of Bennigsen's adjutant. This 
adjutant was also there and sat dozing on the 
rolled-up bedding, evidently exhausted by work 
or by feasting. Two doors led from the room, 
one straight on into what had been the draw- 
ing room, and another, on the right, to the 
study. Through the first door came the sound 
of voices con versing in German and occasional- 
ly in French. In that drawing room were gath- 
ered, by the Emperor's wish, not a military 
council (the Emperor preferred indefinite- 
ness), but certain persons whose opinions he 
wished to know in view of the impending dif- 
ficulties. It was not a council of war, but, as it 
were, a council to elucidate certain questions 
for the Emperor personally. To this semicoun- 
cil had been invited the Swedish General Arm- 
feldt, Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzinge- 
rode (whom Napoleon had referred to as a 
renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, 
Count Stein who was not a military man at all, 
and Pfuel himself, who, as Prince Andrew had 
heard, was the mainspring of the whole affair. 
Prince Andrew had an opportunity of getting 
a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soon after 
himself and, in passing through to the draw- 
ing room, stopped a minute to speak to Cher- 
nyshev. 

At first sight, Pfuel, in his ill-made uniform 
of a Russian general, which fitted him badly 
like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Prince 
Andrew, though he saw him now for the first 
time. There was about him something of Wey- 
rother, Mack, and Schmidt, and many other 
German theorist-generals whom Prince An- 
drew had seen in 1805, but he was more typical 
than any of them. Prince Andrew had never 
yet teen a German theorist in whom all the 
characteristics of those others were united to 
such an extent. 

Pfuel was short and very thin but broad- 
boned, o! coarse, robust build, broad in the 
hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His 



face was much wrinkled and his eyes deep set. 
His hair had evidently been hastily brushed 
smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up 
behind in quaint little tufts. He entered the 
room, looking restlessly and angrily around, 
as if afraid of everything in that large apart- 
ment. Awkwardly holding up his sword, he ad- 
dressed Chernyshev and asked in German 
where the Emperor was. One could see that he 
wished to pass through the rooms as quickly as 
possible, finish with the bows and greetings, 
and sit down to business in front of a map, 
where he would feel at home. He nodded hur- 
riedly in reply to Chernyshev, and smiled iron- 
ically on hearing that the sovereign was in- 
specting the fortifications that he, Pfuel, had 
planned in accord with his theory. He muttered 
something to himself abruptly and in a bass 
voice, as self-assured Germans doit might 
have been "stupid fellow" ... or "the whole 
affair will be ruined," or "something absurd 
will come of it." . . . Prince Andrew did not 
catch what he said and would have passed on, 
but Chernyshev introduced him to Pfuel, re- 
marking that Prince Andrew was just back 
from Turkey where the war had terminated so 
fortunately. Pfuel barely glanced not so much 
at Prince Andrew as past him and said, with 
a laugh: "That must have been a fine tactical 
war"; and, laughing contemptuously, went on 
into the room from which the sound of voices 
was heard. 

Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcas- 
tic, was particularly disturbed that day, evi- 
dently by the fact that they had dared to in- 
spect and criticize his camp in his absence. 
From this short interview with Pfuel, Prince 
Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, 
was able to form a clear conception of the man. 
Pfuel was one of those hopelessly and immu- 
tably self-confident men, self-confident to the 
point of martyrdom as only Germans are, be- 
cause only Germans are self-confident on the 
basis of an abstract notion science, that is, the 
supposed knowledge of absolute truth. A 
Frenchman is self-assured because he regards 
himself personally, both in mind and body, as 
irresistibly attractive to men and women. An 
Englishman is self-assured, as being a citizen 
of the best-organized state in the world, and 
therefore as an Englishman always knows what 
he should do and knows that all he does as an 
Englishman is undoubtedly correct. An Italian 
is self-assured because he is excitable and easily 
forgets himself and other people. A Russian is 
self-assured just because he knows nothing and 



BOOK 

does not want to know anything, since he does 
not believe that anything can be known. The 
German's self-assurance is worst of all, stronger 
and more repulsive than any other, because he 
imagines that he knows the truthscience 
which he himself has invented but which is for 
him the absolute truth. 

Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a 
science the theory of oblique movements de- 
duced by him from the history of Frederick 
the Great's wars, and all he came across in the 
history of more recent warfare seemed to him 
absurd and barbarous monstrous collisions in 
which so many blunders were committed by 
both sides that these wars could not be called 
wars, they did not accord with the theory, and 
therefore could not serve as material for science. 

In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those respon- 
sible for the plan of campaign that ended in 
Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see the 
least proof of the fallibility of his theory in the 
disasters of that war. On the contrary, the de- 
viations made from his theory were, in his 
opinion, the sole cause of the whole disaster, 
and with characteristically gleeful sarcasm he 
would remark, "There, I said the whole affair 
would go to the devil!" Pfuel was one of those 
theoreticians who so love their theory that they 
lose sight of the theory's object its practical 
application. His love of theory made him hate 
everything practical, and he would not listen 
to it. He was even pleased by failures, for fail- 
ures resulting from deviations in practice from 
the theory only proved to him the accuracy of 
his theory. 

He said a few words to Prince Andrew and 
Chernyshev about the present war, with the 
air of a man who knows beforehand that all 
will go wrong, and who is not displeased that 
it should be so. The unbrushed tufts of hair 
sticking up behind and the hastily brushed 
hair on his temples expressed this most elo- 
quently. 

He passed into the next room, and the deep, 
querulous sounds of his voice were at once 
heard from there. 

CHAPTER XI 

PRINCE ANDREW'S eyes were still following Pfuel 
out of the room when Count Bennigsen en- 
tered hurriedly, and nodding to Bolk6nski, 
but not pausing, went into the study, giving 
instructions to his adjutant as he went. The 
Emperor was following him, and Bennigsen 
had hastened on to make some preparations, 
and to be ready to receive the sovereign. Cher- 



NINE 363 

nyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the 
porch, where the Emperor, who looked fa- 
tigued, was dismounting. Marquis Paulucci 
was talking to him with particular warmth and 
the Emperor, with his head bent to the left, 
was listening with a dissatisfied air. The Em- 
peror moved forward evidently wishing to end 
the conversation, but the flushed and excited 
Italian, oblivious of decorum, followed him 
and continued to speak. 

"And as for the man who advised forming 
this camp the Drissa camp," said Paulucci, as 
the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing 
Prince Andrew scanned his unfamiliar face, 
"as to that person, sire . . ." continued Pauluc- 
ci, desperately, apparently unable to restrain 
himself, "the man who advised the Drissa camp 
I see no alternative but the lunatic asylum or 
the gallows!" 

Without heeding the end of the Italian's re- 
marks, and as though not hearing them, the 
Emperor, recognizing Bolk6nski, addressed him 
graciously. 

"I am very glad to see you! Go in there 
where they are meeting, and wait for me." 

The Emperor went into the study. He was 
followed by Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Vol- 
k6nski and Baron Stein, and the door closed 
behind them. Prince Andrew, taking advan- 
tage of the Emperor's permission, accompanied 
Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, in- 
to the drawing room where the council was as- 
sembled. 

Prince Peter Mikhdylovich Volk6nski occu- 
pied the position, as it were, of chief of the 
Emperor's staff. He came out of the study into 
the drawing room with some maps which he 
spread on a table, and put questions on which 
he wished to hear the opinion of the gentle- 
men present. What had happened was that 
news (which afterwards proved to be false) 
had been received during the night of a move- 
ment by the French to outflank the Drissa 
camp. 

The first to speak was General Armfeldt 
who, to meet the difficulty that presented it- 
self, unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new 
position away from the Petersburg and Mos- 
cow roads. The reason for this was inexplicable 
(unless he wished to show that he, too, could 
have an opinion), but he urged that at this 
point the army should unite and there await 
the enemy. It was plain that Armfeldt had 
thought out that plan long ago and now ex- 
. pounded it not so much to answer the ques- 
tions putwhich, in fact, his plan did not an- 



364 



WAR AND PEACE 



swer as to avail himself of the opportunity to 
air it. It was one of the millions of proposals, 
one as good as another, that could be made as 
long as it was quite unknown what character 
the war would take. Some disputed his argu- 
ments, others defended them. Young Count 
Toll objected to the Swedish general's views 
more warmly than anyone else, and in the 
course of the dispute drew from his side pocket 
a well-filled notebook, which he asked permis- 
sion to read to them. In these voluminous notes 
Toll suggested another scheme, totally differ- 
ent from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of cam- 
paign. In answer to Toll, Paulucci suggested 
an advance and an attack, which, he urged, 
could alone extricate us from the present un- 
certainty and from the trap (as he called the 
Drissa camp) in which we were situated. 

During all these discussions Pfuel and his 
interpreter, Wolzogen (his "bridge" in court 
relations), were silent. Pfuel only snorted con- 
temptuously and turned away, to show that he 
would never demean himself by replying to 
such nonsense as he was now hearing. So when 
Prince Volk6nski, who was in the chair, called 
on him to give his opinion, he merely said: 

"Why ask me? General Armfeldt has pro- 
posed a splendid position with an exposed 
rear, or why not this Italian gentleman's at- 
tackvery fine, or a retreat, also goodl Why 
ask me?" said he. "Why, you yourselves know 
everything better than I do." 

But when Volk6nski said, with a frown, that 
it was in the Emperor's name that he asked his 
opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly growing ani- 
mated, began to speak: 

"Everything has been spoiled, everything 
muddled, everybody thought they knew better 
than I did, and now you come to me! How 
mend matters? There is nothing to mend! The 
principles laid down by me must be strictly ad- 
hered to," said he, drumming on the tablewith 
his bony fingers. "What is the difficulty? Non- 
sense, childishness!" 

He went up to the map and speaking rapid- 
ly began proving that no eventuality could al- 
ter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that every- 
thing had been foreseen, and that if the enemy 
were really going to outflank it, the enemy 
would inevitably be destroyed. 

Paulucci, who did not know German, began 
questioning him in French. Wolzogen came to 
the assistance of his chief, who spoke French 
badly, and began translating for him, hardly 
able to keep pace with Pfuel, who was rapidly 
demonstrating that not only all that had hap- 



pened, but all that could happen, had been 
foreseen in his scheme, and that if there were 
now any difficulties the whole fault lay in the 
fact that his plan had not been precisely exe- 
cuted. He kept laughing sarcastically, he dem- 
onstrated, and at last contemptuously ceased 
to demonstrate, like a mathematician who 
ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of 
a problem that has already been proved. Wol- 
zogen took his place and continued to explain 
his views in French, every now and then turn- 
ing to Pfuel and saying, "Is it not so, your ex- 
cellency?" But Pfuel, like a man heated in a 
fight who strikes those on his own side, shouted 
angrily at his own supporter, Wolzogen: 

"Well, of course, what more is there to ex- 
plain?" 

Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wol- 
/ogen simultaneously in French. Armfeldt ad- 
dressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained to 
Volkonski in Russian. Prince Andrew listened 
and observed in silence. 

Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized 
most with Pfuel, angry, determined, and ab- 
surdly self-confident as he was. Of all those 
present, evidently he alone was not seeking 
anything for himself, nursed no hatred against 
anyone, and only desired that the plan, formed 
on a theory arrived at by years of toil, should be 
carried out. He was ridiculous, and unpleasant- 
ly sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntary re- 
spect by his boundless devotion to an idea. Be- 
sides this, the remarks of all except Pfuel had 
one common trait that had not been noticeable 
at the council of war in 1805: there was now a 
panic fear of Napoleon's genius, which, though 
concealed, was noticeable in every rejoinder. 
Everything was assumed to be possible for Na- 
poleon, they expected him from every side, 
and invoked his terrible name to shatter each 
other's proposals. Pfuel alone seemed to con- 
sider Napoleon a barbarian like everyone else 
who opposed his theory. But besides this feel- 
ing of respect, Pfuel evoked pity in Prince An- 
drew. From the tone in which the courtiers 
addressed him and the way Paulucci had al- 
lowed himself to speak of him to the Emperor, 
but above all from a certain desperation in 
Pfuel's own expressions, it was clear that the 
others knew, and Pfuel himself felt, that his 
fall was at hand. And despite his self-confi- 
dence and grumpy German sarcasm he was 
pitiable, with his hair smoothly brushed on the 
temples and sticking up in tufts behind. 
Though he concealed the fact under a show of 
irritation and contempt, he was evidently in 



BOOK NINE 



365 



despair that the sole remaining chance of veri- 
fying his theory by a huge experiment and 
proving its soundness to the whole world was 
slipping away from him. 

The discussions continued a long time, and 
the longer they lasted the more heated became 
the disputes, culminating in shouts and per- 
sonalities, and the less was it possible to arrive 
at any general conclusion from all that had 
been said. Prince Andrew, listening to this 
polyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, ref- 
utations, and shouts, felt nothing but amaze- 
ment at what they were saying. A thought that 
had long since and often occurred to him dur- 
ing his military activitiesthe idea that there 
is not and cannot be any science of war, and 
that therefore there can be no such thing as a 
military genius now appeared to him an ob- 
vious truth. "What theory and science is possi- 
ble about a matter the conditions and circum- 
stances of which are unknown and cannot be 
defined, especially when the strength of the 
acting forces cannot be ascertained? No one 
was or is able to foresee in what condition our 
or the enemy's armies will be in a day's time, 
and no one can gauge the force of this or that 
detachment. Sometimes when there is not a 
coward at the front to shout, 'We are cut off!' 
and start running, but a brave and jolly lad 
who shouts, 'Hurrah!' a detachment of five 
thousand is worth thirty thousand, as at Schon 
Grabern, while at times fifty thousand run 
from eight thousand, as at Austerlitz. What 
science can there be in a matter in which, as in 
all practical matters, nothing can be defined 
and everything depends on innumerable con- 
ditions, the significance of which is determined 
at a particular moment which arrives no one 
knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in 
half, and Paulucci says we have got the French 
army between two fires; Michaud says that the 
worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having 
the river behind it, and Pfuel says that is what 
constitutes its strength; Toll proposes one 
plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good 
and all bad, and the advantages of any sugges- 
tions can be seen only at the moment of trial. 
And why do they all speak of a 'military gen- 
ius'? Is a man a genius who can order bread to 
be brought up at the right time and say who 
is to go to the right and who to the left? It is 
only because military men are invested with 
pomp and power and crowds of sychophants 
flatter power, attributing to it qualities of gen- 
ius it does not possess. The best generals I 
have known were, on the contrary, stupid or 



absent-minded men. Bagrati6n was the best, 
Napoleon himself admitted that. And Bona- 
parte himself 1 I remember his limited, self- 
satisfied face on the field of Austerlitz. Not on- 
ly does a good army commander not need any 
special qualities, on the contrary he needs the 
absence of the highest and best human attri- 
buteslove, poetry, tenderness, and philosoph- 
ic inquiring doubt. He should be limited, 
firmly convinced that what he is doing is very 
important (otherwise he will not have sufficient 
patience), and only then will he be a brave lead- 
er. God forbid that he should be humane, should 
love, or pity, or think of what is just and un- 
just. It is understandable that a theory of their 
'genius' was invented for them long ago be- 
cause they have power! The success of a mili- 
tary action depends not on them, but on the 
man in the ranks who shouts, 'We are lostl' or 
who shouts, 'Hurrahl' And only in the ranks 
can one serve with assurance of being useful." 

So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to 
the talking, and he roused himself only when 
Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving. 

At the review next day the Emperor asked 
Prince Andrew where he would like to serve, 
and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court 
circles forever by not asking to remrfin attached 
to the sovereign's person, but for permission to 
serve in the army. 

CHAPTER XII 

BEFORE THE BEGINNING of the campaign, Ros- 
t6v had received a letter from his parents in 
which they told him briefly of Natdsha's illness 
and the breaking off of her engagement to 
Prince Andrew (which they explained by Na- 
tdsha's having rejected him) and again asked 
Nicholas to retire from the army and return 
home. On receiving this letter, Nicholas did 
not even make any attempt to get leave of ab- 
sence or to retire from the army, but wrote to 
his parents that he was sorry Natasha was ill 
and her engagement broken off, and that he 
would do all he could to meet their wishes. 
To S6nya he wrote separately. 

"Adored friend of my soul! "he wrote. "Noth- 
ing but honor could keep me from returning 
to the country. But now, at the commence- 
ment of the campaign, I should feel dishon- 
ored, not only in my comrades' eyes but in my 
own, if I preferred my own happiness to my 
love and duty to the Fatherland. But this shall 
be our last separation. Believe me, directly 
the war is over, if I am still alive and still loved 
by you, I will throw up everything and fly to 



366 

you, to press you forever to my ardent breast." 

It was, in fact, only the commencement of 
the campaign that prevented Rost6v from re- 
turning home as he had promised and marry- 
ing S6nya. The autumn in Otradnoe with the 
hunting, and the winter with the Christmas 
holidays and Sonya's love, had opened out to 
him a vista of tranquil rural joys and peace 
such as he had never known before, and which 
now allured him. "A splendid wife, children, a 
good pack of hcunds, a dozen leashes of smart 
borzois, agriculture, neighbors, service by elec- 
tion . . ." thought he. But now the campaign 
was beginning, and he had to remain with his 
regiment. And since it had to be so, Nicholas 
Rost6v, as was natural to him, felt contented 
with the life he led in the regiment and was 
able to find pleasure in that life. 

On his return from his furlough Nicholas, 
having been joyfully welcomed by his com- 
rades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought 
back from the Ukraine excellent horses which 
pleased him and earned him commendation 
from his commanders. During his absence he 
had been promoted captain, and when the 
regiment was put on war footing with an in- 
crease in numbers, he was again allotted his 
old squadrbn. 

The campaign began, the regiment was 
moved into Poland on double pay, new of- 
ficers arrived, new men and horses, and above 
all everybody was infected with the merrily ex- 
cited mood that goes with the commencement 
of a war, and Rostov, conscious of his advan- 
tageous position in the regiment, devoted him- 
self entirely to the pleasures and interests of 
military service, though he knew that sooner 
or later he would have to relinquish them. 

The troops retired from Vilna for various 
complicated reasons of state, political and 
strategic. Each step of the retreat was accom- 
panied by a complicated interplay of interests, 
arguments, and passions at headquarters. For 
the Pavlograd hussars, however, the whole of 
this retreat during the finest period of summer 
and with sufficient supplies was a very simple 
and agreeable business. 

It was only at headquarters that there was 
depression, uneasiness, and intriguing; in the 
body of the army they did not ask themselves 
where they were going or why. If they regretted 
having to retreat^, it was only because they had 
to leave billets they had grown accustomed to, 
or some pretty young Polish lady. If the 
thought that things looked bad chanced to en- 
ter anyone's head, he tried to be as cheerful as 



WAR AND PEACE 



befits a good soldier and not to think of the 
general trend of affairs, but only of the task 
nearest to hand. First they camped gaily be- 
fore Vilna, making acquaintance with the 
Polish landowners, preparing for reviews and 
being reviewed by the Emperor and other high 
commanders. Then came an order to retreat to 
Sventsyani and destroy any provisions they 
could not carry away with them. Sventsyani 
was remembered by the hussars only as the 
drunken camp, a name the whole army gave to 
their encampment there, and because many 
complaints were made against the troops, who, 
taking advantage of the order to collect provi- 
sions, took also horses, carriages, and carpets 
from the Polish proprietors. Rostov remem- 
bered Sventsydni, because on the first day of 
their arrival at that small town he changed his 
sergeant major and was unable to manage all 
the drunken men of his squadron who, un- 
known to him, had appropriated five barrels 
of old beer. From Sventsyani they retired far- 
ther and farther to Drissa, and thence again 
beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of 
Russia proper. 

On the thirteenth of July the Pdvlograds 
took part in a serious action for the first time. 

On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that 
action, there was a heavy storm of rain and 
hail. In general, the summer of 1812 was re- 
markable for its storms. 

The two Pdvlograd squadrons were bivouack- 
ing on a field of rye, which was already in ear 
but had been completely trodden down by 
cattle and horses. The rain was descending in 
torrents, and Rostov, with a young officer 
named Ilyfn, his protg, was sitting in a hasti- 
ly constructed shelter. An officer of their regi- 
ment, with long mustaches extending onto his 
cheeks, who after riding to the staff had been 
overtaken by the rain, entered Rost6v'ssheltcr. 

"I have come from the staff, Count. Have 
you heard of Ra^vski's exploit?" 

And the officer gave them details of the Sal- 
tanov battle, which he had heard at the staff. 

Rostov, smoking his pipe and turning his 
head about as the water trickled down his 
neck, listened inattentively, with an occasional 
glance at Ilyfn, who was pressing close to him. 
This officer, a lad of sixteen who had recently 
joined the regiment, was now in the same rela- 
tion to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to 
Denfsov seven years before. Ilyin tried to imi- 
tate Rost6v in everything and adored him as 
a girl might have done. 

Zdrzhinski, the officer with the long mus- 



BOOK NINE 



tache, spoke grandiloquently of the Saltanov 
dam being "a Russian Thermopylae," and of 
how a deed worthy of antiquity had been per- 
formed by General Ravski. He recounted how 
Rae* vski had led his two sons onto the dam un- 
der terrific fire and had charged with them be- 
side him. Rost6v heard the story and not only 
said nothing to encourage Zdrzhinski's enthu- 
siasm but, on the contrary, looked like a man 
ashamed of what he was hearing, though with 
no intention of contradicting it. Since the cam- 
paigns of Austerlitz and of 1807 Rost6v knew 
by experience that men always lie when de- 
scribing military exploits, as he himself had 
done when recounting them; besides that, he 
had experience enough to know that nothing 
happens in war at all as we can imagine or re- 
late it. And so he did not like Zdrzhinski's tale, 
nor did he like Zdrzhinski himself who, with 
his mustaches extending over his cheeks, bent 
low over the face of his hearer, as was his habit, 
and crowded Rost6v in the narrow shanty. 
Rost6v looked at him in silence. "In the first 
place, there must have been such a confusion 
and crowding on the dam that was being at- 
tacked that if Rae*vski did lead his sons there, 
it could have had no effect except perhaps on 
some dozen men nearest to him/' thought he, 
"the rest could not have seen how or with 
whom Radvski came onto the dam. And even 
those who did see it would not have been 
much stimulated by it, for what had they to do 
with Ravski's tender paternal feelings when 
their own skins were in danger? And besides, 
the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on 
whether they took the Saltdnov dam or not, as 
we are told was the case at Thermopylae. So 
why should he have made such a sacrifice? And 
why expose his own children in the battle? I 
would not have taken my brother Pe*tya there, 
or even Ilyin, who's a stranger to me but a nice 
lad, but would have tried to put them some- 
where under cover," Nicholas continued to 
think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did 
not express his thoughts, for in such matters, 
too, he had gained experience. He knew that 
this tale redounded to the glory of our arms 
and so one had to pretend not to doubt it. And 
he acted accordingly. 

"I can't stand this any more," said Ilyfn, no- 
ticing that Rost6v did not relish Zdrzhinski's 
conversation. "My stockings and shirt . . . and 
the water is running on my seatl I'll go and 
look for shelter. The rain seems less heavy." 

Ilyfn went out and Zdrzhinski rode away. 

Five minutes later Ilyfn, splashing through 



567 

the mud, came running back to the shanty. 

"Hurrah! Rostov, come quick! I've found it! 
About two hundred yards away there's a tavern 
where ours have already gathered. We can at 
least get dry there, and Mary Hendrfkhovna's 
there." 

Mary Hendrfkhovna was the wife of the regi- 
mental doctor, a pretty young German woman 
he had married in Poland. The doctor, wheth- 
er from lack of means or because he did not 
like to part from his young wife in the early 
days of their marriage, took her about with 
him wherever the hussar regiment went and 
his jealousy had become a standing joke among 
the hussar officers. 

Rost6v threw his cloak over his shoulders, 
shouted to Lavriishka to follow with the things, 
and now slipping in the mud, now splashing 
right through it set off with Ilyfn in the les- 
sening rain and the darkness that was occa- 
sionally rent by distant lightning. 

"Rost6v, where are you?" 

"Here. What lightning!" they called to one 
another. 

CHAPTER XIII 

IN THE TAVERN, before which stood the doctor's 
covered cart, there were already some five of- 
ficers. Mary Hendrfkhovna, a plump little 
blonde German, in a dressing jacket and night- 
cap, was sitting on a broad bench in the front 
corner. Her husband, the doctor, lay asleep be- 
hind her. Rost6v and Ilyfn, on entering the 
room, were welcomed with merry shouts and 
laughter. 

"Dear me, how jolly we are!" said Rost6v 
laughing. 

"And why do you stand there gaping?" 

"What swells they are! Why, the water 
streams from them! Don't make our drawing 
room so wet." 

"Don't mess Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" 
cried other voices. 

Rostov and Ilyfn hastened to find a corner 
where they could change into dry clothes 
without offending Mary Hendrfkhovna's 
modesty. They were going into a tiny recess 
behind a partition to change, but found 
it completely filled by three officers who sat 
playing cards by the light of a solitary candle 
on an empty box, and these officers would 
on no account yield their position. Mary 
Hendrfkhovna obliged them with the loan 
of a petticoat to be used as a curtain, and be- 
hind that screen Rost6v and Ilyfn, helped 
by Lavriishka who had brought their kit*. 



368 



WAR AND PEACE 



changed their wet things for dry ones. 

A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick 
stove. A board was found, fixed on two saddles 
and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar 
was produced and a cellaret and half a bottle 
of rum, and having asked Mary Hendrfkhovna 
to preside, they all crowded round her. One of- 
fered her a clean handkerchief to wipe her 
charming hands, another spread a jacket un- 
der her little feet to keep them from the damp, 
another hung his coat over the window to keep 
out the draft, and yet another waved the flics 
off her husband's face, lest he should wake up. 

"Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhov- 
na, smiling timidly and happily. "He is sleep- 
ing well as it is, after a sleepless night." 

"Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the 
officer, "one must look after the doctor. Per- 
haps he'll take pity on me someday, when it 
comes to cutting off a leg or an arm for me." 

There were only three tumblers, the water 
was so muddy that one could not make out 
whether the tea was strong or weak, and the 
samovar held only six tumblers of water, but 
this made it all the pleasanter to take turns in 
order of seniority to receive one's tumbler from 
Mary Hendrikhovna's plump little hands with 
their short and not overclean nails. All the of- 
ficers appeared to be, and really were, in love 
with her that evening. Even those playing 
cards behind the partition soon left their game 
and came over to the samovar, yielding to the 
general mood of courting Mary Hendrikhov- 
na. She, seeing herself surrounded by such 
brilliant and polite young men, beamed with 
satisfaction, try as she might to hide it, and 
perturbed as she evidently was each time her 
husband moved in his sleep behind her. 

There was only one spoon, sugar was more 
plentiful than anything else, but it took too 
long to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary 
Hendrikhovna should stir the sugar for every- 
one in turn. Rost6v received his tumbler, and 
adding some rum to it asked Mary Hendrik- 
hovna to stir it. 

"But you take it without sugar?" she said, 
smiling all the time, as if everything she said 
and everything the others said was very amus- 
ing and had a double meaning. 

"It is not the sugar I want, but only that 
your little hand should stir my tea." 

Mary Hendrikhovna assented and began 
looking for the spoon which someone mean- 
while had pounced on. 

"Use your finger, Mary Hendrfkhovna, it 
will be still nicer," said Rost6v. 



"Too hotl" she replied, blushing with pleas- 
ure. 

Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket 
of water and brought it to Mary Hendrikhov- 
na, asking her to stir it with her finger. 

"This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your 
finger in it and I'll drink it all up." 

When they had emptied the samovar, Ros- 
t6v took a pack of cards and proposed that 
they should play "Kings" with Mary Hendrik- 
hovna. They drew lots to settle who should 
make up her set. At Rost6v's suggestion it was 
agreed that whoever became "King" should 
have the right to kiss Mary Hendrikhovna's 
hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill 
and reheat the samovar for the doctor when 
the latter awoke. 

"Well, but supposing Mary Hendrfkhovna 
is 'King'?" asked Ilyin. 

"As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!" 

They had hardly begun to play before the 
doctor's disheveled head suddenly appeared 
from behind Mary Hendrikhovna. He had 
been awake for some time, listening to what 
was being said, and evidently found nothing 
entertaining or amusing in what was going on. 
His face was sad and depressed. Without greet- 
ing the officers, he scratched himself and asked 
to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the 
way. As soon as he had left the room all the of- 
ficers burst into loud laughter and Mary Hen- 
drikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears 
and thereby became still more attractive to 
them. Returning from the yard, the doctor 
told his wife (who had ceased to smile so hap- 
pily, and looked at him in alarm, awaiting her 
sentence) that the rain had ceased and they 
must go to sleep in their covered cart, or every- 
thing in it would be stolen. 

"But I'll send an orderly Two of them!" 

said Rost6v. "What an idea, doctorl" 

"I'll stand guard on it myself!" said Ilyin. 

"No, gentlemen, you have had your sleep, 
but I have not slept for two nights," replied 
the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside 
his wife, waiting for the game to end. 

Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his 
wife, the officers grew still merrier, and some 
of them could not refrain from laughter, for 
which they hurriedly sought plausible pre- 
texts. When he had gone, taking his wife with 
him, and had settled down with her in their 
covered cart, the officers lay down in the tavern, 
covering themselves with their wet cloaks, but 
they did not sleep for a long time; now they 
exchanged remarks, recalling the doctor's un- 



BOOK 

easiness and his wife's delight, now they ran 
out into the porch and reported what was tak- 
ing place in the covered trap. Several times 
Rost6v, covering his head, tried to go to sleep, 
but some remark would arouse him and con- 
versation would be resumed, to the accom- 
paniment of unreasoning, merry, childlike 
laughter. 

CHAPTER XIV 

IT WAS nearly three o'clock but no one was yet 
asleep, when the quartermaster appeared with 
an order to move on to the little town of Os- 
tr6vna. Still laughing and talking, the officers 
began hurriedly getting ready and again boiled 
some muddy water in the samovar. But Ros- 
t6v went off to his squadron without waiting 
for tea. Day was breaking, the rain had ceased, 
arid the clouds were dispersing. It felt damp 
and cold, especially in clothes that were still 
moist. As they left the tavern in the twilight of 
the dawn, Rost6v and Ilyin both glanced un- 
der the wet and glistening leather hood of the 
doctor's cart, from under the apron of which 
his feet were sticking out, and in the middle of 
which his wife's nightcap was visible and her 
sleepy breathing audible. 

"She really is a dear little thing," said Ros- 
t6v to Ilyin, who was following him. 

"A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all 
the gravity of a boy of sixteen. 

Half an hour later the squadron was lined 
up on the road. The command was heard to 
"mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves 
and mounted. Rostov riding in front gave the 
order "Forward!" and the hussars, with clank- 
ing sabers and subdued talk, their horses' 
hoofs splashing in the mud, defiled in fours 
and moved along the broad road planted 
with birch trees on each side, following the 
infantry and a battery that had gone on in 
front. 

Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddening in 
the east, were scudding before the wind. It was 
growing lighter and lighter. That curly grass 
which always grows by country roadsides be- 
came clearly visible, still wet with the night's 
rain; the drooping branches of the birches, al- 
so wet, swayed in the wind and flung down 
bright drops of water to one side. The soldiers' 
faces were more and more clearly visible. Ros- 
t6v, always closely followed by Ilyin, rode 
along the side of the road between two rows of 
birch trees. 

When campaigning, Rost6v allowed himself 
the indulgence of riding not a regimental but 



NINE 



3 6 9 



a Cossack horse. A judge of horses and a sports- 
man, he had lately procured himself a large, 
fine, mettlesome, Done*ts horse, dun-colored, 
with light mane and tail, and when he rode it 
no one could outgallop him. To ride this horse 
was a pleasure to him, and he thought of the 
horse, of the morning, of the doctor's wife, but 
not once of the impending danger. 

Formerly, when going into action, Rost6v 
had felt afraid; now he had not the least feel- 
ing of fear. He was fearless, not because he had 
grown used to being under fire (one cannot 
grow used to danger), but because he had 
learned how to manage his thoughts when in 
danger. He had grown accustomed when go- 
ing into action to think about anything but 
what would seem most likely to interest him 
the impending danger. During the first period 
of his service, hard as he tried and much as he 
reproached himself with cowardice, he had not 
been able to do this, but with time it had come 
of itself. Now he rode beside Ilyin under the 
birch trees, occasionally plucking leaves from 
a branch that met his hand, sometimes touch- 
ing his horse's side with his foot, or, without 
turning round, handing a pipe he had finished 
to an hussar riding behind him, with as calm 
and careless an air as though he were merely 
out for a ride. He glanced with pity at the ex- 
cited face of Ilyin, who talked much and in 
great agitation. He knew from experience the 
tormenting expectation of terror and death 
the cornet was suffering and knew that only 
time could help him. 

As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip 
of sky beneath the clouds, the wind fell, as if 
it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer 
morning after the storm; drops still continued 
to fall, but vertically now, and all was still. 
The whole sun appeared on the horizon and 
disappeared behind a long narrow cloud that 
hung above it. A few minutes later it reap- 
peared brighter still from behind the top of 
the cloud, tearing its edge. Everything grew 
bright and glittered. And with that light, and 
as if in reply to it, came the sound of guns 
ahead of them. 

Before Rostov had had time to consider and 
determine the distance of that firing, Count 
Ostermann-Tolstoy's adjutant came galloping 
from Vitebsk with orders to advance at a trot 
along the road. 

The squadron overtook and passed the in- 
fantry and the battery which had also quick- 
ened their pace rode down a hill, and passing 
through an empty and deserted village again 



37 



WAR AND PEACE 



ascended. The horses began to lather and the 
men to flush. 

"Haiti Dress your ranks!" the order of the 
regimental commander was heard ahead. "For- 
ward by the left. Walk, march!" came the or- 
der from in front. 

And the hussars, passing along the line of 
troops on the left flank of our position, halted 
behind our Uhlans who were in the front line. 
To the right stood our infantry in a dense 
column: they were the reserve. Higher up the 
hill, on the very horizon, our guns were visible 
through the wonderfully clear air, brightly 
illuminated by slanting morn ing sunbeams. In 
front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the 
enemy's columns and guns. Our advanced line, 
already in action, could be heard briskly ex- 
changing shots with the enemy in the dale. 

At these sounds, long unheard, Rost6v's 
spirits rose, as at the strains of the merriest 
music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots, now 
together, now several quickly one after anoth- 
er. Again all was silent and then again it 
sounded as if someone were walking on deto- 
nators and exploding them. 

The hussars remained in the same place for 
about an hour. A cannonade began. Count 
Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the 
squadron, halted, spoke to the commander of 
the regiment, and rode up the hill to the guns. 

After Ostermann had gone, a command rang 
out to the Uhlans. 

"Form column! Prepare to charge!" 

The infantry in front of them parted into 
platoons to allow the cavalry to pass. The Uh- 
lans started, the streamers on their spears flut- 
tering, and trotted downhill toward the French 
cavalry which was seen below to the left. 

As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill, 
the hussars were ordered up the hill to support 
the battery. As they took the places vacated by 
the Uhlans, bullets came from the front, whin- 
ing and whistling, but fell spent without tak- 
ing effect. 

The sounds, which he had not heard for so 
long, had an even more pleasurable and ex- 
hilarating effect on Rost6v than the previous 
sounds of firing. Drawing himself up, he viewed 
the field of battle opening out before him from 
the hill, and with his whole soul followed the 
movement of the Uhlans. They swooped down 
dose to the French dragoons, something con- 
tused happened there amid the smoke, and 
five minutes later our Uhlans were galloping 
back, not to the place they had occupied but 
more to the left, and among the orange-colored 



Uhlans on chestnut horses and behind them, 
in a large group, blue French dragoons on gray 
horses could be seen. 

CHAPTER XV 

ROSTOV, with his keen sportsman's eye, was 
one of the first to catch sight of these blue 
French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans. Nearer 
and nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uh- 
lans and the French dragoons pursuing them. 
He could already see how these men, who 
looked so small at the foot of the hill, jostled 
and overtook one another, waving their arms 
and their sabers in the air. 

Rost6v gazed at what was happening before 
him as at a hunt. He felt instinctively that if 
the hussars struck at the French dragoons now, 
the latter could not withstand them, but if a 
charge was to be made it must be done now, at 
that very moment, or it would be too late. He 
looked around. A captain, standing beside him, 
was gazing like himself with eyes fixed on the 
cavalry below them. 

"Andrew Sevastyinychl" said Rost6v. "You 
know, we could crush them " 

"A fine thing tool" replied the captain, "and 
really . . ." 

Rost6v, without waiting to hear him out, 
touched his horse, galloped to the front of his 
squadron, and before he had time to finish 
giving the word of command, the whole squad- 
ron, sharing his feeling, was following him. 
Rost6v himself did not know how or why he 
did it. He acted as he did when hunting, with- 
out reflecting or considering. He saw the dra- 
goons near and that they were galloping in dis- 
order; he knew they could not withstand an 
attack knew there was only that moment and 
that if he let it slip it would not return. The 
bullets were whining and whistling so stimu- 
latingly around him and his horse was so eager 
to go that he could not restrain himself. He 
touched his horse, gave the word of command, 
and immediately, hearing behind him the 
tramp of the horses of his deployed squadron, 
rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons. 
Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill 
before their pace instinctively changed to a 
gallop, which grew faster and faster as they 
drew nearer to our Uhlans and the French 
dragoons who galloped after them. The dra- 
goons were now close at hand. On seeing the 
hussars, the foremost began to turn, while 
those behind began to halt. With the same 
feeling with which he had galloped across the 
path of a wolf, Rost6v gave rein to his Done* ts 



BOOK NINE 



horse and galloped to intersect the path of the 
dragoons' disordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, 
another who was on foot flung himself to the 
ground to avoid being knocked over, and a 
riderless horse fell in among the hussars. Near- 
ly all the French dragoons were galloping back. 
Rost6v, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed 
after him. On the way he came upon a bush, 
his gallant horse cleared it, and almost before 
he had righted himself in his saddle he saw 
that he would immediately overtake the en- 
emy he had selected. That Frenchman, by his 
uniform an officer, was going at a gallop, 
crouching on his gray horse and urging it on 
with his saber. In another moment Rost6v's 
horse dashed its breast against the hindquarters 
of the officer's horse, almost knocking it over, 
and at the same instant Rost6v, without know- 
ing why, raised his saber and struck the French- 
man with it. 

The instant he had done this, all Rost6v's 
animation vanished. The officer fell, not so 
much from the blowwhich had but slightly 
cut his arm above the elbow as from the 
shock to his horse and from fright. Rost6v 
reined in his horse, and his eyes sought his foe 
to see whom he had vanquished. The French 
dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on 
the ground, the other being caught in the stir- 
rup. His eyes, screwed up with fear as if he 
every moment expected another blow, gazed 
up at Rost6v with shrinking terror. His pale 
and mud-stained face fair and young, with a 
dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes was 
not an enemy's face at all suited to a battlefield, 
but a most ordinary, homelike face. Before 
Rost6v had decided what to do with him, the 
officer cried, "I surrenderl" He hurriedly but 
vainly tried to get his foot out of the stirrup 
and did not remove his frightened blue eyes 
from Rost6v's face. Some hussars who galloped 
up disengaged his foot and helped him into 
the saddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy 
with the dragoons; one was wounded, but 
though his face was bleeding, he would not 
give up his horse; another was perched up be- 
hind an hussar with his arms round him; a 
third was being helped by an hussar to mount 
his horse. In front, the French infantry were 
firing as they ran. The hussars galloped hastily 
back with their prisoners. Rost6v galloped back 
with the rest, aware of an unpleasant feeling 
of depression in his heart. Something vague 
and confused, which he could not at all ac- 
count for, had come over him with the capture 
of that officer and the blow he had dealt him. 



Count Ostermann-Tolst6y met the return- 
ing hussars, sent for Rostov, thanked him, and 
said he would report his gallant deed to the 
Emperor and would recommend him for a St. 
George's Cross. When sent for by Count Oster- 
mann, Rost6v, remembering that he had 
charged without orders, felt sure his command- 
er was sending for him to punish him for 
breach of discipline. Ostermann's flattering 
words and promise of a reward should there- 
fore have struck him all the more pleasantly, 
but he still felt that same vaguely disagreeable 
feeling of moral nausea. "But what on earth is 
worrying me?" he asked himself as he rode 
back from the general. "Ilyfn? No, he's safe. 
Have I disgraced myself in any way? No, that's 
not it." Something else, resembling remorse, 
tormented him. "Yes, oh yes, that French of- 
ficer with the dimple. And I remember how 
my arm paused when I raised it." 

Rost6v saw the prisoners being led away and 
galloped after them to have a look at his 
Frenchman with the dimple on his chin. He 
was sitting in his foreign uniform on an hussar 
packhorse and looked anxiously about him. 
The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be 
called a wound. He glanced at Rost6v with a 
feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting. 
Rost6v still had the same indefinite feeling, as 
of shame. 

All that day and the next his friends and 
comrades noticed that Rost6v, without being 
dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and pre- 
occupied. He drank reluctantly, tried to re- 
main alone, and kept turning something over 
in his mind. 

Rostov was always thinking about that bril- 
liant exploit of his, which to his amazement 
had gained him the St. George's Cross and even 
given him a reputation for bravery, and there 
was something he could not at all understand. 
"So others are even more afraid than I ami" 
he thought. "So that's all there is in what is 
called heroism I And did I do it for my country's 
sake? And how was he to blame, with his dim- 
ple and blue eyes? And how frightened he wasl 
He thought that I should kill him. Why should 
I kill him? My hand trembled. And they have 
given me a St. George's Cross. ... I can't make 
it out at all." 

But while Nicholas was considering these 
questions and still could reach no clear solu- 
tion of what puzzled him so, the wheel of for- 
tune in the service, as often happens, turned 
in his favor. After the affair at Ostr6vna he 
was brought into notice, received command of 



37* 

an hussar battalion, and when a brave officer 

was needed he was chosen. 

CHAPTER XVI 

ON RECEIVING NEWS of Natdsha's illness, the 
countess, though not quite well yet and still 
weak, went to Moscow with Pdtya and the 
rest of the household, and the whole family 
moved from Marya Dmftrievna's house to their 
own and settled down in town. 

Natdsha's illness was so serious that, fortu- 
nately for her and for her parents, the consider- 
ation of all that had caused the illness, her 
conduct and the breaking off of her engage- 
ment, receded into the background. She was 
so ill that it was impossible for them to consid- 
er in how far she was to blame for what had 
happened. She could not eat or sleep, grew 
visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors 
made them feel, was in danger. They could not 
think of anything but how to help her. Doctors 
came to see her singly and in consultation, 
talked much in French, German, and Latin, 
blamed one another, and prescribed a great 
variety of medicines for all the diseases known 
to them, but the simple idea never occurred 
to any of them that they could not know the 
disease Natasha was suffering from, as no dis- 
ease suffered by a live man can be known, for 
every living person has his own peculiarities 
and always has his own peculiar, personal, nov- 
el, complicated disease, unknown to medicine 
not a disease of the lungs, liver, skin, heart, 
nerves, and so on mentioned in medical books, 
but a disease consisting of one of the innumer- 
able combinations of the maladies of those or- 
gans. This simple thought could not occur to 
the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard that 
he is unable to work his charms) because the 
business of their lives was to cure, and they re- 
ceived money for it and had spent the best 
years of their lives on that business. But, above 
all, that thought was kept out of their minds 
by the fact that they saw they were really use- 
ful, as in fact they were to the whole Rost6v 
family. Their usefulness did not depend on 
making the patient swallow substances for the 
most part harmful (the harm was scarcely per- 
ceptible, as they were given in small doses), 
but they were useful, necessary, and indispen- 
sable because they satisfied a mental need of 
the invalid and of those who loved her and 
that is why there are, and always will be, 
pseudo-healers, wise women, homeopaths, and 
allopaths. They satisfied that eternal human 
need for hope of relief, for sympathy, and that 



WAR AND PEACE 

something should be done, which is felt by 
those who are suffering. They satisfied the need 
seen in its most elementary form in a child, 
when it wants to have a place rubbed that has 
been hurt. A child knocks itself and runs at 
once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have 
the aching spot rubbed or kissed, and it feels 
better when this is done. The child cannot 
believe that the strongest and wisest of its peo- 
ple have no remedy for its pain, and the hope 
of relief and the expression of its mother's 
sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it. 
The doctors were of use to Natdsha because 
they kissed and rubbed her bump, assuring 
her that it would soon pass if only the coach- 
man went to the chemist's in the Arbdt and 
got a powder and some pills in a pretty box for 
a ruble and seventy kopeks, and if she took 
those powders in boiled water at intervals of 
precisely two hours, neither more nor less. 

What would S6nya and the count and count- 
ess have done, how would they have looked, if 
nothing had been done, if there had not been 
those pills to give by the clock, the warm drinks, 
the chicken cutlets, and all the other details of 
life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of 
which supplied an occupation and consola- 
tion to the family circle? How would the count 
have borne his clearly loved daughter's illness 
had he not known that it was costing him a 
thousand rubles, and that he would not grudge 
thousands more to benefit her, or had he not 
known that if her illness continued he would 
not grudge yet other thousands and would take 
her abroad for consultations there, and had he 
not been able to explain the details of howMe"- 
tivier and Feller had not understood the symp- 
toms, but Frise had, and Miidrov had diag- 
nosed them even better? What would the 
countess have done had she not been able 
sometimes to scold the invalid for not strictly 
obeying the doctor's orders? 

"You'll never get well like that," she would 
say, forgetting her grief in her vexation, "if 
you won't obey the doctor and take your medi- 
cine at the right time! You mustn't trifle with 
it, you know, or it may turn to pneumonia!' 
she would go on, deriving much comfort from 
the utterance of that foreign word, incompre- 
hensible to others as well as to herself. 

What would S6nya have done without the 
glad consciousness that she had not undressed 
during the first three nights, in order to be 
ready to carry out all the doctor's injunctions 
with precision, and that she still kept awake at 
night so as not to miss the proper time when 



BOOK NINE 



373 



the slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box 
had to be administered? Even to Natasha her- 
self it was pleasant to see that so many sacri- 
fices were being made for her sake, and to know 
that she had to take medicine at certain hours, 
though she declared that no medicine would 
cure her and that it was all nonsense. And it was 
even pleasant to be able to show, by disregard- 
ing the orders, that she did not believe in medi- 
cal treatment and did not value her life. 

The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, 
looked at her tongue, and regardless of her 
grief-stricken face joked with her. But when 
he had gone into another room, to which the 
countess hurriedly followed him, he assumed 
a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head 
said that though there was danger, he had 
hopes of the effect of this last medicine and 
one must wait and see, that the malady was 
chiefly mental, but . . . And the countess, try- 
ing to conceal the action from herself and from 
him, slipped a gold coin into his hand and al- 
ways returned to the patient with a more tran- 
quil mind. 

The symptoms of Natdsha's illness were that 
she ate little, slept little, coughed, and was al- 
ways low-spirited. The doctors said that she 
could not get on without medical treatment, so 
they kept her in the stifling atmosphere of the 
town, and the Rostovs did riot move to the 
country that summer of 1812. 

In spite of the many pills she swallowed and 
the drops and powders out of the little bottles 
and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was 
fond of such things made a large collection, and 
in spite of being deprived of the country life to 
which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. 
Natdsha's grief began to be overlaid by the 
impressions of daily life, it ceased to press so 
painfully on her heart, it gradually faded into 
the past, and she began to recover physically. 

CHAPTER XVII 

NATASHA WAS CALMER but no happier. She not 
merely avoided all external forms of pleasure 
balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters 
but she never laughed without a sound of tears 
in her laughter. She could not sing. As soon as 
she began to laugh, or tried to sing by herself, 
tears choked her: tears of remorse, tears at the 
recollection of those pure times which could 
never return, tears of vexation that she should 
so uselessly have ruined her young life which 
might have been so happy. Laughter and sing- 
ing in particular seemed to her like a blas- 
phemy, in face of her sorrow. Without any 



need of self-restraint, no wish to coquet ever 
entered her head. She said and felt at that time 
that no man was more to her than Nastisya 
Ivdnovna, the buffoon. Something stood senti- 
nel within her and forbade her every joy. Be- 
sides, she had lost all the old interests of her 
carefree girlish life that had been so full of hope. 
The previous autumn, the hunting, "Uncle," 
and the Christmas holidays spent with Nicho- 
las at Otrddnoe were what she recalled often- 
est and most painfully. What would she not 
have given to bring back even a single day of 
that timel But it was gone forever. Her pre- 
sentiment at the time had not deceived her 
that that state of freedom and readiness for 
any enjoyment would not return again. Yet it 
was necessary to live on. 

It comforted her to reflect that she was not 
better as she had formerly imagined, but worse, 
much worse, than anybody else in the world. 
But this was not enough. She knew that, and 
asked herself, "What next?" But there was 
nothing to come. There was no joy in life, yet 
life was passing. Natasha apparently tried not 
to be a burden or a hindrance to anyone, but 
wanted nothing for herself. She kept away 
from everyone in the house and felt at ease on- 
ly with her brother Ptya. She liked to be with 
him better than with the others, and when 
alone with him she sometimes laughed. She 
hardly ever left the house and of those who 
came to see them was glad to see only one per- 
son, Pierre. It would have been impossible to 
treat her with more delicacy, greater care, and 
at the same time more seriously than did Count 
Bezukhov. Natdsha unconsciously felt this del- 
icacy and so found great pleasure in his society. 
But she was not even grateful to him for it; 
nothing good on Pierre's part seemed to her to 
be an effort, it seemed so natural for him to be 
kind to everyone that there was no merit in 
his kindness. Sometimes Natdsha noticed em- 
barrassment and awkwardness on his part in 
her presence, especially when he wanted to do 
something to please her, or feared that some- 
thing they spoke of would awaken memories 
distressing to her. She noticed this and attrib- 
uted it to his general kindness and shyness, 
which she imagined must be the same toward 
everyone as it was to her. After those involun- 
tary words that if he were free he would have 
asked on his knees for her hand and her love- 
uttered at a moment when she was so strongly 
agitated, Pierre never spoke to Natdsha of his 
feelings; and it seemed plain to her that those 
words, which had then so comforted her, were 



374 



spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are 
spoken to comfort a crying child. It was not be- 
cause Pierre was a married man, but because 
Natasha felt very strongly with him that moral 
barrier the absence of which she had experi- 
enced with Kuragin that it never entered her 
head that the relations between him and her- 
self could lead to love on her part, still less 
on his, or even to the kind of tender, self- 
conscious, romantic friendship between a 
man and a woman of which she had known 
several instances. 

Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Agra- 
fna Ivdnovna Belova, a country neighbor of 
the Rostovs, came to Moscow to pay her devo- 
tions at the shrines of the Moscow saints. She 
suggested that Natdsha should fast and pre- 
pare for Holy Communion, and Natasha glad- 
ly welcomed the idea. Despite the doctor's or- 
ders that she should not go out early in the 
morning, Natasha insisted on fasting and pre- 
paring for the sacrament, not as they generally 
prepared for it in the Rostov family by attend- 
ing three services in their own house, but as 
Agrafe"na Ivdnovna did, by going to church 
every day for a week and not once missing 
Vespers, Matins, or Mass. 

The countess was pleased with Natasha's 
zeal; after the poor results of the medical treat- 
ment, in the depths of her heart she hoped that 
prayer might help her daughter more than 
medicines and, though not without fear and 
concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to 
Natasha's wish and entrusted her to Belova. 
Agrafcna Ivanovna used to come to wake Na- 
tasha at three in the morning, but generally 
found her already awake. She was afraid of be- 
ing late for Matins. Hastily washing, and meek- 
ly putting on her shabbiest dress and an old 
mantilla, Natasha, shivering in the fresh air, 
went out into the deserted streets lit by the 
clear light of dawn. By Agraf^na Ivanovna's 
advice Natasha prepared herself not in their 
own parish, but at a church where, according 
to the devout Agratena Ivanovna, the priest 
was a man of very severe and lofty life. There 
were never many people in the church; Nata- 
sha always stood beside Belova in the customary 
place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let 
into the screen before the choir on the left 
side, and a feeling, new to her, of humility be- 
fore something great and incomprehensible, 
seized her when at that unusual morning hour, 
gazing at the dark face of the Virgin illumi- 
nated by the candles burning before it and by 
the morning light falling from the window, 



WAR AND PEACE 

she listened to the words of the service which 
she tried to follow with understanding. When 
she understood them her personal feeling be- 
came interwoven in the prayers with shades of 
its own. When she did not understand, it was 
sweeter still to think that the wish to under- 
stand everything is pride, that it is impossible 
to understand all, that it is only necessary to 
believe and to commit oneself to God, whom 
she felt guiding her soul at those moments. She 
crossed herself, bowed low, and when she did 
not understand, in horror at her own vileness, 
simply asked God to forgive her everything, 
everything, and to have mercy upon her. The 
prayers to which she surrendered herself most 
of all were those of repentance. On her way 
home at an early hour when she met no one 
but bricklayers going to work or men sweeping 
the street, and everybody within the houses was 
still asleep, Natdsha experienced a feeling new 
to her, a sense of the possibility of correcting 
her faults, the possibility of a new, clean life, 
and of happiness. 

During the whole week she spent in this 
way, that feeling grew every day. And the hap- 
piness of taking communion, or "communing" 
as Agrafe"na Ivdnovna, joyously playing with 
the word, called it, seemed to Natasha so great 
that she felt she should never live till that 
blessed Sunday. 

But the happy day came, and on that memo- 
rable Sunday, when, dressed in white muslin, 
she returned home after communion, for the 
first time for many months she felt calm and 
not oppressed by the thought of the life that 
lay before her. 

The doctor who came to see her that day or- 
dered her to continue the powders he had pre- 
scribed a fortnight previously. 

"She must certainly go on taking them morn- 
ing and evening," said he, evidently sincerely 
satisfied with his success. "Only, please be par- 
ticular about it. 

"Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as 
he adroitly took the gold coin in his palm. 
"She will soon be singing and frolicking about. 
The last medicine has done her a very great 
deal of good. She has freshened up very much." 

The countess, with a cheerful expression on 
her face, looked down at her nails and spat a 
little for luck as she returned to the drawing 
room. 



CHAPTER XVIII 

AT THE BEGINNING of July more and more dis- 
quieting reports about the war began to spread 



BOOK NINE 



in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the 
Emperor to the people, and of his coming him- 
self from the army to Moscow. And as up to the 
eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had 
been received, exaggerated reports became 
current about them and about the position of 
Russia. It was said that the Emperor was leav- 
ing the army because it was in danger, it was 
said that Smolensk had surrendered, that Na- 
poleon had an army of a million and only a 
miracle could save Russia. 

On the eleventh of July, which was Satur- 
day, the manifesto was received but was not 
yet in print, and Pierre, who was at the Ros- 
tovs', promised to come to dinner next day, 
Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifesto and 
appeal, which he would obtain from Count 
Rostopchin. 

That Sunday, the Rost6vs went to Mass at 
the RazurruVvskis' private chapel as usual. It 
was a hot July day. Even at ten o'clock, when 
the Rostovs got out of their carriage at the 
chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of hawkers, 
the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd, 
the dusty leaves of the trees on the boulevard, 
the sounds of the band and the white trousers 
of a battalion marching to parade, the rattling 
of wheels on the cobblestones, and the brilliant, 
hot sunshine were all full of that summer lan- 
guor, that content and discontent with the pres- 
ent, which is most strongly felt on a bright, hot 
day in town. All the Moscow notabilities, all 
the Rost6vs' acquaintances, were at the Razu- 
m6vskis' chapel, for, as if expecting something 
to happen, many wealthy families who usually 
left town for their country estates had not 
gone away that summer. As Natasha, at her 
mother's side, passed through the crowd be- 
hind a liveried footman who cleared the way 
for them, she heard a young man speaking about 
her in too loud a whisper. 

"That's Rostova, the one who ..." 

"She's much thinner, but all the same she's 
prettyl" 

She heard, or thought she heard, the names 
of Kuragin and Bolk6nski. But she was always 
imagining that. It always seemed to her that 
everyone who looked at her was thinking only 
of what had happened to her. With a sinking 
heart, wretched as she always was now when 
she found herself in a crowd, Natasha in her 
lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace walked 
as women can walkwith the more repose 
and stateliness the greater the pain and shame 
in her soul. She knew for certain that she was 
pretty, but this no longer gave her satisfaction 



375 



as it used to. On the contrary it tormented her 
more than anything else of late, and particular- 
ly so on this bright, hot summer day in town. 
"It's Sunday again another week past," she 
thought, recalling that she had been here the 
Sunday before, "and always the same life that 
is no life, and the same surroundings in which 
it used to be so easy to live. I'm pretty, 1'myoung, 
and I know that now I am good. I used to be 
bad, but now I know I am good," she thought, 
"but yet my best years are slipping by and are 
no good to anyone." She stood by her mother's 
side and exchanged nods with acquaintances 
near her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies' 
dresses, condemned the bearing of a lady stand- 
ing close by who was not crossing herself prop- 
erly but in a cramped manner, and again she 
thought with vexation that she was herself be- 
ing judged and was judging others, and sud- 
denly, at the sound of the service, she felt hor- 
rified at her own vileness, horrified that the 
former purity of her soul was again lost to her. 

A comely, fresh-looking old man was con- 
ducting the service with that mild solemnity 
which has so elevating and soothing an effect 
on the souls of the worshipers. The gates of the 
sanctuary screen were closed, the curtain was 
slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft myste- 
rious voice pronounced some words. Tears, the 
cause of which she herself did not understand, 
made Natdsha's breast heave, and a joyous but 
oppressive feeling agitated her. 

"Teach me what I should do, how to live my 
life, how I may grow good forever, forever!" 
she pleaded. 

The deacon came out onto the raised space 
before the altar screen and, holding his thumb 
extended, drew his long hair from under his 
dalmatic and, making the sign of the cross on 
his breast, began in a loud and solemn voice to 
recite the words of the prayer. . . . 

"In peace let us pray unto the Lord." 

"As one community, without distinction of 
class, without enmity, united by brotherly love 
let us prayl" thought Natasha. 

"For the peace that is from above, and for 
the salvation of our souls." 

"For the world of angels and all the spirits 
who dwell above us," prayed Natdsha. 

When they prayed for the warriors, she 
thought of her brother and Denisov. When 
they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, 
she remembered Prince Andrew, prayed for 
him, and asked God to forgive her all the 
wrongs she had done him. When they prayed 
for those who love us, she prayed for the mem- 



376 



WAR AND PEACE 



bers of her own family, her father and mother 
and Sonya, realizing for the first time how 
wrongly she had acted toward them, and feel- 
ing all the strength of her love for them. When 
they prayed for those who hate us, she tried to 
think of her enemies and people who hated 
her, in order to pray for them. She included 
among her enemies the creditors and all who 
had business dealings with her father, and al- 
ways at the thought of enemies and those who 
hated her she remembered Anatole who had 
done her so much harmand though he did 
not hate her she gladly prayed for him as for 
an enemy. Only at prayer did she feel able to 
think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and 
Anatole, as men for whom her feelings were as 
nothing compared with her awe and devotion 
to God. When they prayed for the Imperial 
family and the Synod, she bowed very low and 
made the sign of the cross, saying to herself that 
even if she did not understand, still she could 
not doubt, and at any rate loved the govern- 
ing Synod and prayed for it. 

When he had finished the Litany the deacon 
crossed the stole over his breast and said, "Let 
us commit ourselves and our whole lives to 
Christ the Lord!" 

"Commit ourselves to God," Natdsha in- 
wardly repeated. "Lord God, I submit myself 
to Thy willl" she thought. "I want nothing, 
wish for nothing; teach me what to do and 
how to use my willl Take me, take mel" prayed 
Natasha, with impatient emotion in her heart, 
not crossing herself but letting her slender arms 
hang down as if expecting some invisible pow- 
er at any moment to take her and deliver her 
from herself, from her regrets, desires, remorse, 
hopes, and sins. 

The countess looked round several times at 
her daughter's softened face and shining eyes 
and prayed God to help her. 

Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service, 
and not in the usual order Natasha knew so 
well, the deacon brought out a small stool, the 
one he knelt on when praying on Trinity Sun- 
day, and placed it before the doors of the sanc- 
tuary screen. The priest came out with his pur- 
ple velvet biretta on his head, adjusted his 
hair, and knelt down with an effort. Every- 
body followed his example and they looked at 
one another in surprise. Then came the prayer 
just received from the Synod a prayer for the 
deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion. 

"Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" 
began the priest in that voice, clear, not gran- 
diloquent but mild, in which only the Slav 



clergy read and which acts so irresistibly on a 
Russian heart. 

"Lord God of might, God of our salvation! 
Look this day in mercy and blessing on Thy 
humble people, and graciously hear us, spare 
us, and have mercy upon us! This foe con- 
founding Thy land, desiring to lay waste the 
wholeworld, rises against us; these lawless men 
are gathered together to overthrow Thy king- 
dom, to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem, Thy be- 
loved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to over- 
throw Thine altars, and to desecrate our 
holy shrines. How long, O Lord, how long 
shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they 
wield unlawful power? 

"Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee; 
strengthen with Thy might our most gracious 
sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pdvlo- 
vich; be mindful of his uprightness and meek- 
ness, reward him according tohis righteousness, 
and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless 
his counsels, his undertakings, and his work; 
strengthen his kingdom by Thine almighty 
hand, and give him victory over his enemy, 
even as Thou gavest Moses the victory over 
Amalek, Gideon over Midian, and David over 
Goliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass 
in the hands of those who have armed them- 
selves in Thy Name, and gird their loins with 
strength for the fight. Take up the spear and 
shield and arise to help us; confound and put 
to shame those who have devised evil against 
us, may they be before the faces of Thy faith- 
ful warriors as dust before the wind, and may 
Thy mighty Angel confound them and put 
them to flight; may they be ensnared when they 
know it not, and may the plots they have laid 
in secret be turned against them; let them fall 
before Thy servants' feet and be laid low by 
our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save both 
great and small; Thou art God, and man can- 
not prevail against Thee! 

"God of our fathers! Remember Thy boun- 
teous mercy and loving-kindness which are 
from of old; turn not Thy face from us, but 
be gracious to our unworthiness, and in Thy 
great goodness and Thy many mercies regard 
not our transgressions and iniquities! Create 
in us a clean heart and renew a right spirit 
within us, strengthen us all in Thy faith, forti- 
fy our hope, inspire us with true love one for 
another, arm us with unity of spirit in the 
righteous defense of the heritage Thou gavest 
to us and to our fathers, and let not the scepter 
of the wicked be exalted against the destiny of 
those Thou hast sanctified. 



BOOK NINE 



377 



"O Lord our God, in whom we believe and 
in whom we put our trust, let us not be con- 
founded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give 
us a token of Thy blessing, that those who hate 
us and our Orthodox faith may see it and be 
put to shame and perish, and may all the na- 
tions know that Thou art the Lord and we are 
Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us this day, 
O Lord, and grant us Thy salvation; make the 
hearts of Thy servants to rejoice in Thy mercy; 
smite down our enemies and destroy them 
swiftly beneath the feet of Thy faithful serv- 
ants! For Thou art the defense, the succor, and 
the victory of them that put their trust in Thee, 
and to Thee be all glory, to Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost, now and forever, world without 
end. Amen." 

In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this 
prayer affected her strongly. She listened to ev- 
ery word about the victory of Moses over Am- 
alek,of Gideon over Midian,and of David over 
Goliath, and about the destruction of "Thy 
Jerusalem," and she prayed to God with the 
tenderness and emotion with which her heart 
was overflowing, but without fully understand- 
ing what she was asking of God in that prayer. 
She shared with all her heart in the prayer for 
the spirit of righteousness, for the strengthen- 
ing of the heart by faith and hope, and its an- 
imation by love. But she could not pray that 
her enemies might be trampled under foot 
when but a few minutes before she had been 
wishing she had more of them that she might 
pray for them. But neither could she doubt 
the righteousness of the prayer that was being 
read on bended knees. She felt in her heart a 
devout and tremulous awe at the thought of 
the punishment that overtakes men for their 
sins, and especially of her own sins, and she 
prayed to God to forgive them all, and her too, 
and to give them all, and her too, peace and 
happiness. And it seemed to her that God 
heard her prayer. 

CHAPTER XIX 

FROM THE DAY when Pierre, after leaving the 
Rost6vs' with Natasha's grateful look fresh in 
his mind, had gazed at the comet that seemed to 
be fixed in the sky and felt that something new 
was appearing on his own horizon from that 
day the problem of the vanity and uselessness 
of all earthly things, that had incessantly tor- 
mented him, no longer presented itself. That 
terrible question "Why?" "Wherefore?" which 
had come to him amid every occupation, was 
now replaced, not by another question or by a 



reply to the former question, but by her image. 
When he listened to, or himself took part in, 
trivial conversations, when he read or heard 
of human baseness or folly, he was not horri- 
fied as formerly, and did not ask himself why 
men struggled so about these things when all 
is so transient and incomprehensiblebut he 
remembered her as he had last seen her, and 
all his doubts vanished not because she had 
answered the questions that had haunted him, 
but because his conception of her transferred 
him instantly to another, a brighter, realm of 
spiritual activity in which no one could be jus- 
tified or guilty a realm of beauty and love 
which it was worth living for. Whatever world- 
ly baseness presented itself to him, he said to 
himself: 

"Well, supposing N. N. has swindled the 
country and the Tsar, and the country and the 
Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that 
matter? She smiled at me yesterday and asked 
me to come again, and I love her, and no one 
will ever know it." And his soul felt calm and 
peaceful. 

Pierre still went into society, drank as much 
and led the same idle and dissipated life, be- 
cause besides the hours he spent at the Ros- 
t6vs' there were other hours he had to spend 
somehow, and the habits and acquaintances he 
had made in Moscow formed a current that 
bore him along irresistibly. But latterly, when 
more and more disquieting reports came from 
the seat of war and Natasha's health began to 
improve and she no longer aroused in him the 
former feeling of careful pity, an ever-increas- 
ing restlessness, which he could not explain, 
took possession of him. He felt that the condi- 
tion he was in could not continue long, that 
a catastrophe was coming which would change 
his whole life, and he impatiently sought ev- 
erywhere for signs of that approaching catas- 
trophe. One of his brother Masons had re- 
vealed to Pierre the following prophecy con- 
cerning Napoleon, drawn from the Revelation 
of St. John. 

In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, 
it is said: 

Here is wisdom. Let him that hath un- 
derstanding count the number of the 
beast: for it is the number of a man; and 
his number is Six hundred threescore and 
six. 
And in the fifth verse of the same chapter: 

And there was given unto him a mouth 
speaking great things and blasphemies; 



378 

and power was given unto him to contin- 
ue forty and two months. 

The French alphabet, written out with the 
same numerical values as the Hebrew, in which 
the first nine letters denote units and the oth- 
ers tens, will have the following significance: 



a 
i 
1 

20 



b c 

* 3 
m 
30 40 



n 



t 
100 



u 
no 



e 

5 
o 

50 

V 
120 



f g h 
678 

p q 
GO 70 

w 



WAR AND PEACE 

what means, he was connected with the great 
event foretold in the Apocalypse he did not 
know, but he did not doubt that connection 
for a moment. His love for Natdsha, Antichrist, 
Napoleon, the invasion, the comet, 666, L'Em- 
pereurNapole'on^nd L'russe Besuhof all this 
had to mature and culminate, to lift him out 
of that spellbound, petty sphere of Moscow 
habits in which he felt himself held captive, and 
lead him to a great achievement and great hap- 
piness. 



i k 

9 
r 

80 90 
x y 



10 

s 



130 140 150 



z 

160 



Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in 
numbers, it appears that the sum of them is 
666, 1 and that Napoleon was therefore the beast 
foretold in the Apocalypse. Moreover, by ap- 
plying the same system to the words quarante- 
deuxf which was the term allowed to the beast 
that "spoke great things and blasphemies," the 
same number 666 was obtained; from which 
it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon's 
power had come in the year 1812 when the 
French emperor was forty-two. This prophecy 
pleased Pierre very much and he often asked 
himself what would put an end to the power 
of the beast, that is, of Napoleon, and tried by 
the same system of using letters as numbers and 
adding them up, to find an answer to the ques- 
tion that engrossed him. He wrote the words 
L'Empereur Alexandre, La nation russe and 
added up their numbers, but the sums were 
either more or less than 666. Once when mak- 
ing such calculations he wrote down his own 
name in French, Comte Pierre Besouhoff, but 
the sum of the numbers did not come right. 
Then he changed the spelling, substituting a 
z for the s and adding de and the article le, still 
without obtaining the desired result. Then it 
occurred to him: if the answer to the question 
were contained in his name, his nationality 
would also be given in the answer. So he wrote 
Le russe Besuhof and adding up the numbers 
got 671. This was only five too much, and five 
was represented by e, the very letter elided 
from the article le before the word Empereur. 
By omitting the e&gt; though incorrectly, Pierre 
got the answer he sought. L'russe Besuhof made 
666. This discovery excited him. How, or by 

1 Including a 5 for the letter e dropped by eli- 
sion from the le before Empereur. TR. 
1 Forty-two. 



On the eve of the Sunday when the special 
prayer was read, Pierre had promised the Ros- 
t6vs to bring them, from Count Rostopchfn 
whom he knew well, both the appeal to the 
people and the latest news from the army. In 
the morning, when he went to call at Rostop- 
chin's he met there a courier fresh from the ar- 
my, an acquaintance of his own, who often 
danced at Moscow balls. 

"Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of 
something!" said the courier. "I have a sackful 
of letters to parents." 

Among these letters wat one from Nicholas 
Rost6vto his father. Pierre took that letter, and 
Rostopchfn also gave him the Emperor's ap- 
peal to Moscow, which had just been printed, 
the last army orders, and his own most recent 
bulletin. Glancing through the army orders, 
Pierre found in one of them, in the lists of killed, 
wounded, and rewarded, the name of Nicholas 
Rost6v, awarded a St. George's Cross of the 
Fourth Class for courage shown in the Ostr6v- 
na affair, and in the same order the name of 
Prince Andrew Bolk6nski, appointed to the 
command of a regiment of Chasseurs. Though 
he did not want to remind the Rost6vs of Bol- 
k6nski, Pierre could not refrain from making 
them happy by the news of their son's having 
received a decoration, so he sent that printed 
army order and Nicholas' letter to the Rost6vs, 
keeping the appeal, the bulletin, and the other 
orders to take with him when he went to din- 
ner. 

His conversation with Count Rostopchin 
and the latter's toneof anxious hurry, the meet- 
ing with the courier who talked casually of how 
badly things were going in the army, the ru- 
mors of the disco very of spies in Moscow and of 
a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon 
promised to be in both the Russian capitals by 
the autumn, and the talk of the Emperor's being 
expected to arrive next day all aroused with 
fresh force that feeling of agitation and expec- 
tation in Pierre which he had been conscious 



BOOK NINE 



of ever since the appearance of the comet, and 
especially since the beginning of the war. 

He had long been thinking of enter ing the ar- 
my and would have done so had he not been 
hindered, first, by his membership of the Society 
of Freemasons to which he was bound by oath 
and which preached perpetual peace and the ab- 
olition of war, and secondly, by the fact that 
when he saw the great mass of Muscovites who 
had donned uniform and were talking patriot- 
ism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step. 
But the chief reason for not carrying out his 
intention to enter the army lay in the vague 
idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the 
number of the beast, 666; that his part in the 
great affair of setting a limit to the power of 
the beast that spoke great and blasphemous 
things had been predestined from eternity, and 
that therefore he ought not to undertake any- 
thing, but wait for what was bound to come to 
pass. 

CHAPTER XX 

A FEW INTIMATE FRIENDS were dining with the 
Rost6vs that day, as usual on Sundays. 

Pierre came early so as to find them alone. 

He had grown so stout this year that he 
would have been abnormal had he not been so 
tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he car- 
ried his bulk with evident ease. 

He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering 
something. His coachman did not even ask 
whether he was* to wait. He knew that when his 
master was at the Rost6vs' he stayed till mid- 
night. The Rost6vs' footman rushed eagerly 
forward to help him off with his cloak and take 
his hat and stick. Pierre, from club habit, al- 
ways left both hat and stick in the anteroom. 

The first person he saw in the house was Na- 
tasha. Even before he saw her, while taking off 
his cloak, he heard her. She was practicing sol- 
fa exercises in the music room. He knew that 
she had not sung since her illness, and so the 
sound of her voice surprised and delighted him. 
He opened the door softly and saw her, in the 
lilac dress she had worn at church, walking 
about the room singing. She had her back to 
him when he opened the door, but when, turn- 
ing quickly, she saw his broad, surprised face, 
she blushed and came rapidly up to him. 

"I want to try to sing again," she said, add- 
ing as if by way of excuse, "it is, at least, some- 
thing to do*" 

"That's capital!" 

"How glad I am you've come! I am so hap- 
py today," she said, with the old animation 



379 



Pierre had not seen in her for a long time. "You 
know Nicholas has received a St. George's 
Cross? I am so proud of him." 

"Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I 
don't want to interrupt you," he added, and 
was about to go to the drawing room. 

Natasha stopped him. 

"Count, is it wrong of me to sing?" she said 
blushing, and fixing her eyes inquiringly on 
him. 

"No . . . Why should it be? On the contrary 
. . . But why do you ask me?" 

"I don't know myself," Natdsha answered 
quickly, "but I should not like to do anything 
you disapproved of. I believe in you complete- 
ly. You don't know how important you are to 
me, how much you've done for me. ..." She 
spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre 
flushed at her words. "I saw in that same army 
order that he, Bolk6nski" (she whispered the 
name hastily), "is in Russia, and in the army 
again. What do you think?" she was speaking 
hurriedly, evidently afraid her strength might 
fail her "Will he ever forgive me? Will he not 
always have a bitter feeling toward me? What 
do you think? What do you think?" 

"I think . . ." Pierre replied, "that he has 
nothing to forgive If I were in his place . . ." 

By association of ideas, Pierre was at once 
carried back to the day when, trying to com- 
fort her, he had said that if he were not him- 
self but the best man in the world and free, he 
would ask on his knees for her hand; and the 
same feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took 
possession of him and the same words rose to 
his lips. But she did not give him time to say 
them. 

"Yes, you . . . you . . ." she said, uttering the 
word you rapturously" that's a different thing. 
I know no one kinder, more generous, or bet- 
ter than you; nobody could be! Had you not 
been there then, and now too, I don't know 
what would have become of me, because . . ." 

Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned 
away, lifted her music before her eyes, began 
singing again, and again began walking up and 
down the room. 

Just then Ptya came running in from the 
drawing room. 

Ptkya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen 
with full red lips and resembled Natasha. He 
was preparing to enter the university, but he 
and his friend Obotenski had lately, in secret, 
agreed to join the hussars. 

Ptya had come rushing out to talk to hia 
namesake about this affair. He had asked 



380 WAR AND PEACE 

Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted 
in the hussars. 

Pierre walked up and down the drawing 
room, not listening to what Ptya was saying. 

Pe"tya pulled him by the arm to attract his 
attention. 

"Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirttych, 
for heaven's sake! You are my only hope I" said 
Pekya. 

"Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussars? I'll 
mention it, I'll bring it all up today." 

"Well, mon cher, have you got the manifes- 
to?" asked the old count. "The countess has 
been to Mass at the Razumovskis' and heard 
the new prayer. She says it's very fine." 

"Yes, I've got it," said Pierre. "The Emperor 
is to be here tomorrow . . . there's to be an Ex- 
traordinary Meeting of the nobility, and they 
are talking of a levy of ten men per thousand. 
Oh yes, let me congratulate you!" 

"Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news 
from the army?" 

"We are again retreating. They say we're al- 
ready near Smolensk," replied Pierre. 

"O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count. 
"Where is the manifesto?" 

"The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!" 

Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the 
papers, but could not find them. Still slapping 
his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess 
who entered the room and glanced uneasily 
around, evidently expecting Natasha, who had 
left off singing but had not yet come into the 
drawing room. 

"On my word, I don't know what I've done 
with it," he said. 

"There he is, always losing everything!" re- 
marked the countess. 

Natasha entered with a softened and agitat- 
ed expression of face and sat down looking si- 
lently at Pierre. As soon as she entered, Pierre's 
features, which had been gloomy, suddenly 
lighted up, and while still searching for the pa- 
pers he glanced at her several times. 

"No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left 
them there. I'll certainly . . ." 

"But you'll be late for dinner." 

"Oh! And my coachman has gone." 

But S6nya, who had gone to look for the pa- 
pers in the anteroom, had found them in 
Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked 
them under the lining. Pierre was about to be- 
gin reading. 

"No, after dinner," said the old count, evi- 
dently expecting much enjoyment from that 
reading. 



At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to 
the health of the new chevalier of St. George, 
Shinshfn told them the town news, of the ill- 
ness of the old Georgian princess, of Mdtivier's 
disappearance from Moscow, and of how some 
German fellow had been brought to Rostop- 
chin and accused of being a French "spyer" (so 
Count Rostopchin had told thestory),and how 
Rostopchfn let him go and assured the people 
that he was "not a spire at all, but only an old 
German ruin." 

"People are being arrested . . ." said the 
count. "I've told the countess she should not 
speak French so much. It's not the time for it 
now." 

"And have you heard?" Shinshin asked. 
"Prince Golitsyn has engaged a master to teach 
him Russian. It is becoming dangerous to speak 
French in the streets." 

"And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? 
If they call up the militia, you too will have to 
mount a horse," remarked the old count, ad- 
dressing Pierre. 

Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all 
through dinner, seeming not to grasp what was 
said. He looked at the count. 

"Oh yes, the war," he said. "No! What sort 
of warrior should I make? And yet everything 
is so strange, so strange! I can't make it out. I 
don't know, I am very far from having military 
tastes, but in these times no one can answer 
for himself." 

After dinner the count settled himself com- 
fortably in an easy chair and with a serious 
face asked Sonya, who was considered an ex- 
cellent reader, to read the appeal. 

"To Moscow, our ancient Capital! 

"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia 
with immense forces. He comes to despoil our be- 
loved country," 

Sonya read painstakingly in her high-pitched 
voice. The count listened with closed eyes, 
heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages. 

Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching 
look now at her father and now at Pierre. 

Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to 
look round. The countess shook her head dis- 
approvingly and angrily at every solemn expres- 
sion in the manifesto. In all these words she 
saw only that the danger threatening her son 
would not soon be over. Shinshin, with a sar- 
castic smile on his lips, was evidently preparing 
to make fun of anything that gave him the op- 
portunity: S6nya's reading, any remark of the 
count's, or even the manifesto itself should no 
better pretext present itself. 



BOOK 

After reading about the dangers that threat- 
ened Russia, the hopes the Emperor placed on 
Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobil- 
ity, S6nya, with a quiver in her voice due chief- 
ly to the attention that was being paid to her, 
read the last words: 

"We ourselves will not delay to appear among 
our people in that Capital and in others parts of 
our realm for consultation, and for the direction 
of all our levies, both those now barring the ene- 
my's path and those freshly formed to defeat him 
wherever he may appear. May the ruin he hopes to 
bring upon us recoil on his own head, and may 
Europe delivered from bondage glorify the name 
of Russia!" 

"Yes, that's itl" cried the count, opening his 
moist eyes and sniffing repeatedly, as if a strong 
vinaigrette had been held to his nose; and he 
added, "Let the Emperor but say the word and 
we'll sacrifice everything and begrudge noth- 
ing." 

Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke 
he was ready to make on the count's patriotism, 
Natdsha jumped up from her place and ran to 
her father. 

"What a darling our Papa isl" she cried, kiss- 
ing him, and she again looked at Pierre with 
the unconscious coquetry that had returned to 
her with her better spirits. 

"There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shin- 
shin. 

"Not a patriot at all, but simply . . ." Natdsha 
replied in an injured tone. "Everything seems 
funny to you, but this isn't at all a joke. . . ." 

"A joke indeed!" put in the count. "Let him 
but say the word and we'll all go. ... We're 
not Germansl" 

"But did you notice, it says, 'for consulta- 
tion'?" said Pierre. 

"Never mind what it's for. . . ." 

At this moment, Ptya, to whom nobody 
was praying any attention, came up to his 
father with a very flushed face and said in his 
breaking voice that was now deep and now 
shrill: 

"Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mam- 
ma too, it's as you please, but I say definitely 
that you must let me enter the army, because I 
can't . . . that's all. . . ." 

The countess, in dismay, looked up to heav- 
en, clasped her hands, and turned angrily to 
her husband. 

"That comes of your talking!" said she. 

But the count had already recovered from 
his excitement. 



NINE 381 

"Come, come!" said he. "Here's a fine war- 
rior! No! Nonsense! You must study." 

"It's not nonsense, Papa. Fedya Obotenski is 
younger than I, and he's going too. Besides, all 
the same I can't study now when . . ." Petya 
stopped short, flushed till he perspired, but 
still got out the words, "when our Fatherland 
is in danger." 

"That'll do, that'll do nonsense. . . ." 

"But you said yourself that we would sacri- 
fice everything." 

"Pckya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, 
with a glance at his wife, who had turned pale 
and was staring fixedly at her son. 

"And I tell you Peter Kirttych here will also 
tell you . . ." 

"Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother's milk 
has hardly dried on your lips and you want to 
go into the army! There, there, I tell you," and 
the count moved to go out of the room, taking 
the papers, probably to reread them in his 
study before having a nap. 

"Well, Peter Kiiilych, let's go and have a 
smoke," he said. 

Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natasha's 
unwontedly brilliant eyes, continually glancing 
at him with a more than cordial look, had re- 
duced him to this condition. 

"No, I think I'll go home." 

"Home? Why, you meant to spend the eve- 
ning with us. ... You don't often come nowa- 
days as it is, and this girl of mine," said the 
count good-naturedly, pointing to Natasha, 
"only brightens up when you're here." 

"Yes, I had forgotten ... I really must 
go home . . . business . . ." said Pierre hur- 
riedly. 

"Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and 
went out of the room. 

"Why are you going? Why are you upset?" 
asked Natdsha, and she looked challengingly 
into Pierre's eyes. 

"Because I love you!" was what he wanted to 
say, but he did not say it, and only blushed till 
the tears came, and lowered his eyes. 

"Because it is better forme to come less of ten 
. . . because . . . No, simply I have business " 

"Why? No, tell me!" Natdsha began resolute- 
ly and suddenly stopped. 

They looked at each other with dismayed 
and embarrassed faces. He tried to smile 
but could not: his smile expressed suffering, 
and he silently kissed her hand and went 
out. 

Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Ros- 
t6vs' any more. 



382 



WAR AND PEACE 



CHAPTER XXI 

AFTER THE definite refusal he had received, Pe*t- 
ya went to his room and there locked himself 
in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea, 
silent, morose, and with tear-stained face, every- 
body pretended not to notice anything. 

Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, 
and several of the Rost6vs' domestic serfs 
begged permission to go to have a look at him. 
That morning Pckya was a long time dressing 
and arranging his hair and collar to look like 
a grown-up man. He frowned before his look- 
ing glass, gesticulated, shrugged his shoulders, 
and finally, without saying a word to anyone, 
took his cap and left the house by the back 
door, trying to avoid notice. P(hya decided to 
go straight to where the Emperor was and to 
explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting 
(he imagined the Emperor to be always sur- 
rounded by gentlemen-in-waiting) that he, 
Count Rost6v, in spite of his youth wished to 
serve his country; that youth could be no hin- 
drance to loyalty, and that he was ready to ... 
While dressing, Pc^tya had prepared many fine 
things he meant to say to the gentleman-in- 
waiting. 

It was on the very fact of being so young 
that PeHya counted for success in reaching the 
Emperor he even thought how surprised every- 
one would be at his youthfulriess and yet in 
the arrangement of his collar and hair and by 
his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear 
a grown-up man. But the farther he went and 
the more his attention was diverted by the 
ever-increasing crowds moving toward the 
Kremlin, the less he remembered to walk with 
the sedateness and deliberation of a man. As 
he approached the Kremlin he even began to 
avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck out 
his elbows in a menacing way. But within the 
Trinity Gateway he was so pressed to the wall 
by people who probably were unaware of the 
patriotic intentions with which he had come 
that in spite of all his determination he had to 
give in, and stop while carriages passed in, 
rumbling beneath the archway. Beside Pe"tya 
stood a peasant woman, a footman, two trades- 
men, and a discharged soldier. After standing 
some time in the gateway, Ptftya tried to move 
forward in front of the others without waiting 
for all the carriages to pass, and he began reso- 
lutely working his way with his elbows, but the 
woman just in front of him, who was the first 
against whom he directed his efforts, angrily 
shouted at him: 

"What are you shoving for, young lordling? 



Don't you see we're all standing still? Then 
why push?" 

"Anybody can shove," said the footman, and 
also began working his elbows to such effect 
that he pushed P^tya into a very filthy corner 
of the gateway. 

P6tya wiped his perspiring face with his 
hands and pulled up the damp collar which he 
had arranged so well at home to seem like a 
man's. 

He felt that he no longer looked presentable, 
and feared that if he were now to approach the 
gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he would 
not be admitted to the Emperor. But it was 
impossible to smarten oneself up or move to 
another place, because of the crowd. One of 
the generals who drove past was an acquaint- 
ance of the Rostcws', and P^tya thought of ask- 
ing his help, but came to the conclusion that 
that would not be a manly thing to do. When 
the carriages had all passed in, the crowd, car- 
rying Ptya with it, streamed forward into the 
Krdmlin Square which was already full of peo- 
ple. There were people not only in the square, 
but everywhere on the slopes and on the roofs. 
As soon as Ptftya found himself in the square 
he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joy- 
ous voices of the crowd that filled the whole 
Kremlin. 

For a while the crowd was less dense, but 
suddenly all heads were bared, and everyone 
rushed forward in one direction. PC* tya was be- 
ing pressed so that he could scarcely breathe, 
and everybody shouted, "Hurrah! hurrah! hur- 
rah!" Pe*tya stood on tiptoe and pushed and 
pinched, but could see nothing except the peo- 
ple about him. 

All the faces bore the same expression of ex- 
citement and enthusiasm. A tradesman's wife 
standing beside Pe"tya sobbed, and the tears 
ran down her cheeks. 

"Father! Angel! Dear one!" she kept repeat- 
ing, wiping away her tears with her fingers. 

"Hurrah!" was heard on all sides. 

For a moment the crowd stood still, but then 
it made another rush forward. 

Quite beside himself, P^tya, clinching his 
teeth and rolling his eyes ferociously, pushed 
forward, elbowing his way and shouting "hur- 
rah!" as if he were prepared that instant to kill 
himself and everyone else, but on both sides 
of him other people with similarly ferocious 
faces pushed forward and every body- shouted 
"hurrah!" 

"So this is what the Emperor is I" thought 
Pehya. "No, I can't petition him myself that 



BOOK NINE 



383 



would be too bold." But in spite of this he con- 
tinued to struggle desperately forward, and 
from between the backs of those in front he 
caught glimpses of an open space with a strip 
of red cloth spread out on it; but just then the 
crowd swayed back the police in front were 
pushing back those who had pressed too close 
to the procession: the Emperor was passing 
from the palace to the Cathedral of the As- 
sumptionand P(kya unexpectedly received 
such a blow on his side and ribs and was 
squeezed so hard that suddenly everything 
grew dim before his eyes and he lost conscious- 
ness. When he came to himself, a man of cleri- 
cal appearance with a tuft of gray hair at the 
back of his head and wearing a shabby blue 
cassock probably a church clerk and chanter 
was holding him under the arm withone hand 
while warding off the pressure of the crowd 
with the other. 

"You've crushed the young gentleman!"said 
the clerk. "What are you up to? Gently! . . . 
They've crushed him, crushed him!" 

The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the 
Assumption. The crowd spread out again more 
evenly, and the clerk led Ptftya pale and breath- 
lessto the Tsar-cannon. 1 Several people were 
sorry for Pe*tya, and suddenly a crowd turned 
toward him and pressed round him. Those 
who stood nearest him attended to him, un- 
buttoned his coat, seated him on the raised 
platform of the cannon, and reproached those 
others (whoever they might be) who had 
crushed him. 

"One might easily get killed that way! What 
do they mean by it? Killing people! Poor dear, 
he's as white as a sheet!" various voices were 
heard saying. 

Ptya soon came to himself, the color re- 
turned to his face, the pain had passed, and at 
the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he 
had obtained a place by the cannon from where 
he hoped to see the Emperor who would be re- 
turning that way. P(hya no longer thought of 
presenting his petition. If he could only see 
the Emperor he would be happy 1 

While the service was proceeding in the 
Cathedral of the Assumption it was a com- 
bined service of prayer on the occasion of the 
Emperor's arrival and of thanksgiving for the 
conclusion of peace with the Turks the crowd 
outside spread out and hawkers appeared, sell- 
ing kvas, gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets 
(of which Ptya was particularly fond), and- 

1 A very large cannon cast in 1488 and preserved 
in the Moscow Kremlin as a curiosity. TR. 



ordinary conversation could again be heard. A 
tradesman's wife was showing a rent in her 
shawl and telling how much the shawl had 
cost; another was saying that all silk goods had 
now got dear. The clerk who had rescued Pt- 
yawas talking to a functionary about the priests 
who were officiating that day with the bishop. 
The clerk several times used the word "plena- 
ry" (of the service), a word P^tya did not un- 
derstand. Two young citizens were joking with 
some serf girls who were cracking nuts. All 
these conversations, especially the joking with 
the girls, were such as might have had a par- 
ticular charm for P^tya at his age, but they did 
not interest him now. He sat on his elevation 
the pedestal of the cannon still agitated as be- 
fore by the thought of the Emperor and by his 
love for him. The feeling of pain and fear he 
had experienced when he was being crushed, 
together with that of rapture, still further in- 
tensified his sense of the importance of the oc- 
casion. 

Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon 
was heard from the embankment, to celebrate 
the signing of peace with the Turks, and the 
crowd rushed impetuously toward the embank- 
ment to watch the firing. Pe"tya too would have 
run there, but the clerk who had taken the 
young gentleman under his protection stopped 
him. The firing was still proceeding when of- 
ficers, generals, and gentlemen-in-waiting came 
running out of the cathedral, and after them 
others in a more leisurely manner: caps were 
again raised, and those who had run to look at 
the cannon ran back again. At last four men in 
uniforms and sashes emerged from the cathe- 
dral doors. "Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted the 
crowd again. 

"Which is he? Which?" asked P^tya in a 
tearful voice, of those around him, but no one 
answered him, everybody was too excited; and 
Pdtya, fixing on one of those four men, whom 
he could not clearly see for the tears of joy that 
filled his eyes, concentrated all his enthusiasm 
on him though it happened not to be the Em- 
perorfrantically shouted "Hurrah!" and re- 
solved that tomorrow, come what might, he 
would join the army. 

The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed 
him to the palace, and began to disperse. It 
was already late, and Ptya had not eaten any- 
thing and was drenched with perspiration, yet 
he did not go home but stood with that dimin- 
ishing, but still considerable, crowd before the 
palace while the Emperor dined looking in 
at the palace windows, expecting he knew not 



WAR AND PEACE 



what, .and envying alike the notables he saw 
arriving at the entrance to dine with the Em- 
peror and the court footmen who served at 
table, glimpses of whom could be seen through 
the windows. 

While the Emperor was dining, Valuev, look- 
ing out of the window, said: 

"The people are still hoping to see Your 
Majesty again." 

The dinner was nearly over, and the Emper- 
or, munching a biscuit, rose and went out onto 
the balcony. The people, with Petya among 
them, rushed toward the balcony. 

"Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father! . . ." 
cried the crowd, and Ptya with it, and again 
the women and men of weaker mold, Pdtya 
among them, wept with joy. 

A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor 
was holding in his hand broke off, fell on the 
balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A 
coachman in a jerkin, who stood nearest, sprang 
forward and snatched it up. Several people in 
the crowd rushed at the coachman. Seeing this 
the Emperor had a plateful of biscuits brought 
him and began throwing them down from the 
balcony. Ptya's eyes grew bloodshot, and still 
more excited by the danger of being crushed, 
he rushed at the biscuits. He did not know 
why, but he had to have a biscuit from the 
Tsar's hand and he felt that he must not give 
way. He sprang forward and upset an old 
woman who was catching at a biscuit; the old 
woman did not consider herself defeated though 
she was lying on the ground she grabbed at 
some biscuits but her hand did not reach them. 
Pe*tya pushed her hand away with his knee, 
seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, 
again shouted "Hurrah!" with a voice already 
hoarse. 

The Emperor went in, and after that the 
greater part of the crowd began to disperse. 

"There I I said if only we waited and so it 
was!" was being joyfully said by various peo- 
pie. 

Happy as Ptya was, he felt sad at having to 
go home knowing that all the enjoyment of 
that day was over. He did not go straight home 
from the Kremlin, but called on his friend 
Obol^nski, who was fifteen and was also enter- 
ing the regiment. On returning home Ptya 
announced resolutely and firmly that if he was 
not allowed to enter the service he would run 
away. And next day, Count Ilyd Rost6v though 
he had not yet quite yielded went to inquire 
how he could arrange for Ptya to serve where 
there would be least danger. 



CHAPTER XXII 

Two DAYS LATER, on the fifteenth of July, an 
immense number of carriages were standing 
outside the Slob6da Palace. 
The great halls were full. In the first were 
the nobility and gentry in their uniforms, in 
the second bearded merchants in full-skirted 
coats of blue cloth and wearing medals. In the 
noblemen's hall there was an incessant move- 
ment and buzz of voices. The chief magnates 
sat on high-backed chairs at a large table under 
the portrait of the Emperor, but most of the 
gentry were strolling about the room. 

All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day 
at the Club or in their own houses, were in uni- 
form some in that of Catherine's day, others 
in that of the Emperor Paul, others again in 
the new uniforms of Alexander's time or the 
ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the gen- 
eral characteristic of being in uniform imparted 
something strange and fantastic to these di- 
verse and familiar personalities, both old and 
young. The old men, dim-eyed, toothless, bald, 
sallow, and bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled, 
were especially striking. For the most part they 
sat quietly in their places and were silent, or, 
if they walked about and talked, attached them- 
selves to someone younger. On all these faces, 
as on the faces of the crowd Petya had seen in 
the Square, there was a striking contradiction: 
the general expectation of a solemn event, and 
at the same time the everyday interests in a 
boston card party, Peter the cook,ZinafdaDmi- 
trievna's health, and so on. 

Pierre was there too, buttoned up since early 
morning in a nobleman's uniform that had be- 
come too tight for him. He was agitated; this 
extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but 
also of the merchant-class les dtats gdntraux 
(States-General) evoked in him a whole series 
of ideas he had long laid aside but which were 
deeply graven in his soul: thoughts of the Con- 
trat social and the French Revolution. The 
words that had struck him in the Emperor's 
appeal that the sovereign was coming to the 
capital for consultation with his people- 
strengthened this idea. And imagining that in 
this direction something important which he 
had long awaited was drawing near, he strolled 
about watching and listening to conversations, 
but nowhere finding any confirmation of the 
ideas that occupied him. 

The Emperor's manifesto was read, evoking 
enthusiasm, and then all moved about discus- 
sing it. Besides the ordinary topics of conver- 
sation, Pierre heard questions of where the 



BOOK 

marshals of the nobility were to stand when 
the Emperor entered, when a ball should be 
given in the Emperor's honor, whether they 
should group themselves by districts or by 
whole provinces . . . and so on; but as soon as 
the war was touched on, or what the nobility 
had been convened for, the talk became unde- 
cided and indefinite. Then all preferred listen- 
ing to speaking. 

A middle-aged man, handsome and virile, in 
the uniform of a retired naval officer, was speak- 
ing in one of the rooms, and a small crowd was 
pressing round him. Pierre went up to the cir- 
cle that had formed round the speaker and lis- 
tened. Count Ilyd Rost6v, in a military uni- 
form of Catherine's time, was sauntering with 
a pleasant smile among the crowd, with all of 
whom he was acquainted. He too approached 
that group and listened with a kindly smile 
and nods of approval, as he always did, to what 
the speaker was saying. The retired naval man 
was speaking very boldly, as was evident from 
the expression on the faces of the listeners and 
from the fact that some people Pierre knew as 
the meekest and quietest of men walked away 
disapprovingly or expressed disagreement with 
him. Pierre pushed his way into the middle of 
the group, listened, and convinced himself that 
the man was indeed a liberal, but of views 
quite different from his own. The naval officer 
spoke in a particularly sonorous, musical, and 
aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantly swallow- 
ing his r's and generally slurring his conso- 
nants: the voice of a man calling out to his serv- 
ant, "Heah! Bwing me my pipe!" It was indic- 
ative of dissipation and the exercise of author- 
ity. 

"What if the Smolensk people have offahd 
to waise militia for the Empewah? Ah we to 
take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noble awis- 
tocwacy of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, 
it can show its loyalty to our sov'weign the 
Empewah in othah ways. Have we fo'gotten 
the waising of the militia in the yeah 'seven? 
All that did was to enwich the pwiests' sons 
and thieves and wobbahs. . . ." 

Count llyd Rost6v smiled blandly and nod- 
ded approval. 

"And was our militia of any use to the Em- 
pia? Not at all! It only wuined our farmingl 
Bettah have another conscwiption . . . o' ou' 
men will wetu'n neithah soldiers no' peasants, 
and we'll get only depwavity fwom them. The 
nobility don't gwudge theah lives evewy one 
of us will go and bwing in more wecwuits, and 
the sov'weign" (that was the way he referred 



NINE 385 

to the Emperor) "need only say the word and 
we'll all die fo* him!" added the orator with 
animation. 

Count Rost6v's mouth watered with pleasure 
and he nudged Pierre, but Pierre wanted to 
speak himself. He pushed forward, feeling 
stirred, but not yet sure what stirred him or 
what he would say. Scarcely had he opened his 
mouth when one of the senators, a man with- 
out a tooth in his head, with a shrewd though 
angry expression, standing near the first speak- 
er, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to 
managing debates and to maintaining an ar- 
gument, he began in low but distinct tones: 

"I imagine, sir," said he, mumbling with his 
toothless mouth, "that we have been summoned 
here not to discuss whether it's best for the em- 
pire at the present moment to adopt conscrip- 
tion or to call out the militia. We have been 
summoned to reply to the appeal with which 
our sovereign the Emperor has honored us. 
But to judge what is best conscription or the 
militia we can leave to the supreme authori- 
ty. . . ." 

Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excite- 
ment. He hardened his heart against the sena- 
tor who was introducing this set and narrow 
attitude into the deliberations of the nobility. 
Pierre stepped forward and interrupted him. 
He himself did not yet know what he would 
say, but he began to speak eagerly, occasional- 
ly lapsing into French or expressing himself in 
bookish Russian. 

"Excuse me, your excellency," he began. (He 
was well acquainted with the senator, but 
thought it necessary on this occasion to ad- 
dress him formally.) "Though I don't agree 
with the gentleman . . ." (he hesitated: he 
wished to say, "Mon ires honorable pr^opin- 
ant""My very honorable opponent") "with 
the gentleman . . . whom I have not the honor 
of knowing, I suppose that the nobility have 
been summoned not merely to express their 
sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider 
the means by which we can assist our Father- 
land! I imagine," he went on, warming to his 
subject, "that the Emperor himself would not 
be satisfied to find in us merely owners of serfs 
whom we are willing to devote to his service, 
and chair a canon* we are ready to make of 
ourselves and not to obtain from us any co- 
co-counsel." 

Many persons withdrew from the circle, no- 
ticing the senator's sarcastic smile and the free- 
dom of Pierre's remarks. Only Count Rost6v 

1 "Food for cannon." 



386 



was pleased with them as he had been pleased 
with those of the naval officer, the senator, and 
in general with whatever speech he had last 
heard. 

"I think that before discussing these ques- 
tions," Pierre continued, "we should ask the 
Emperor most respectfully ask His Majesty 
to let us know the number of our troops and 
the position in which our army and our forces 
now are, and then . . ." 

But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words 
before he was attacked from three sides. The 
most vigorous attack came from an old ac- 
quaintance, a boston player who had always 
been well disposed toward him, Stepan Step- 
anovich Adraksin. Adraltsin was in uniform, 
and whether as a result of the uniform or from 
some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a 
different man. With a sudden expression of 
malevolence on his aged face, Adrdksin shouted 
at Pierre: 

"In the first place, I tell you we have no right 
to question the Emperor about that, and sec- 
ondly, if the Russian nobility had that right, 
the Emperor could not answer such a question. 
The troops are moved according to the enemy's 
movements and the number of men increases 
and decreases " 

Another voice, that of a nobleman of medi- 
um height and about forty years of age, whom 
Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies' and 
knew as a bad cardplayer, and who, also trans- 
formed by his uniform, came up to Pierre, in- 
terrupted Adrdksin. 

"Yes, and this is not a time for discussing," 
he continued, "but for acting: there is war in 
Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroy 
Russia, to desecrate the tombs of our fathers, 
to carry off our wives and children." The no- 
bleman smote his breast. "We will all arise, 
every one of us will go, for our father the 
Tsar!" he shouted, rolling his bloodshot eyes. 
Several approving voices were heard in the 
crowd. "We are Russians and will not grudge 
our blood in defense of our faith, the throne, 
and the Fatherland! We must cease raving if 
we are sons of our Fatherland! We will show 
Europe how Russia rises to the defense of Rus- 
sia!" 

Pierre wished to reply, but could not get in 
a word. He felt that his words, apart from what 
meaning they conveyed, were less audible than 
the sound of his opponent's voice. 

Count Rost6v at the back of the crowd was 
expressing approval; several persons, briskly 



WAR AND PEACE 

turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of 



a phrase, said: 

"That's right, quite right! Just so!" 

Pierre wished to say that he was ready to 
sacrifice his money, his serfs, or himself, only 
one ought to know the state of affairs in order 
to be able to improve it, but he was unable to 
speak. Many voices shouted and talked at the 
same time, so that Count Rost6v had not time 
to signify his approval of them all, and the 
group increased, dispersed, re-formed, and then 
moved with a hum of talk into the largest hall 
and to the big table. Not only was Pierre's at- 
tempt to speak unsuccessful, but he was rude- 
ly interrupted, pushed aside, and people turned 
away from him as from a common enemy. This 
happened not because they were displeased by 
the substance of his speech, which had even 
been forgotten after the many subsequent 
speeches, but to animate it the crowd needed 
a tangible object to love and a tangible object 
to hate. Pierre became the latter. Many other 
orators spoke after the excited nobleman, and 
all in the same tone. Many spoke eloquently 
and with originality. 

Glinka, the editor of the Russian Messenger, 
who was recognized (cries of "author! author!" 
were heard in the crowd), said that "hell must 
be repulsed by hell," and that he had seen a 
child smiling at lightning flashes and thunder- 
claps, but "we will not be that child." 

"Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!" was repeated 
approvingly in the back rows of the crowd. 

The crowd drew up to the large table, at 
which sat gray-haired or bald seventy-year-old 
magnates, uniformed and besashed, almost all 
of whom Pierre had seen in their own homes 
with their buffoons, or playing boston at the 
clubs. With an incessant hum of voices the 
crowd advanced to the table. Pressed by the 
throng against the high backs of the chairs, the 
orators spoke one after another and sometimes 
two together. Those standing behind noticed 
what a speaker omitted to say and hastened to 
supply it. Others in that heat and crush racked 
their brains to find some thought and hastened 
to utter it. The old magnates, whom Pierre 
knew, sat and turned to look first at one and 
then at another, and their faces for the most 
part only expressed the fact that they found it 
very hot. Pierre, however, felt excited, and the 
general desire to show that they were ready to 
go to all lengthswhich found expression in 
the tones and looks more than in the substance 
of the speeches infected him too. He did not 



BOOK 

renounce his opinions, but felt himself in 
some way to blame and wished to justify him- 
self. 

"I only said that it would be more to the 
purpose to make sacrifices when we know what 
is needed!" said he, trying to be heard above 
the other voices. 

One of the old men nearest to him looked 
round, but his attention was immediately di- 
verted by an exclamation at the other side of 
the table. 

"Yes, Moscow will be surrenderedl She will 
be our expiation!" shouted one man. 

"He is the enemy of mankind!" cried anoth- 
er. "Allow me to speak. . . ." "Gentlemen, you 
are crushing me! . . ." 

CHAPTER XXIII 

AT THAT MOMENT Count Rostopchfn with his 
protruding chin and alert eyes, wearing the 
uniform of a general with sash over his shoul- 
der, entered the room, stepping briskly to the 
front of the crowd of gentry. 

"Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in 
a moment," said Rostopchfn. "I am straight 
from the palace. Seeing the position we are 
in, I think there is little need for discussion. 
The Emperor has deigned to summon us 
and the merchants. Millions will pour forth 
from there" he pointed to the merchants' 
hall "but our business is to supply men and 
not spare ourselves. . . . That is the least we 
can do!" 

A conference took place confined to the 
magnates sitting at the table. The whole con- 
sultation passed more than quietly. After all 
the preceding noise the sound of their old 
voices saying one after another, "I agree," or 
for variety, "I too am of that opinion," and so 
on had even a mournful effect. 

The secretary was told to write down the 
resolution of the Moscow nobility and gentry, 
that they would furnish ten men, fully 
equipped, out of every thousand serfs, as the 
Smolensk gentry had done. Their chairs made 
a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had 
conferred rose with apparent relief, and began 
walking up and d6wn, arm in arm, to stretch 
their legs and converse in couples. 

"The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden 
cry resounded through the halls and the whole 
throng hurried to the entrance. 

The Emperor entered the hall through a 
broad path between two lines of nobles. Every 
face expressed respectful, awe-struck curiosity. 



NINE 387 

Pierre stood rather far off and could not hear 
all that the Emperor said. From what he did 
hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of 
the danger threatening the empire and of the 
hopes he placed on the Moscow nobility. He 
was answered by a voice which informed him 
of the resolution just arrived at. 

"Gentlemen!" said the Emperof with aquiv- 
ering voice. 

There was a rustling among the crowd and 
it again subsided, so that Pierre distinctly heard 
the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor 
saying with emotion: 

"I never doubted the devotion of the Rus- 
sian nobles, but today it has surpassed my ex- 
pectations. I thank you in the name of the 
Fatherland! Gentlemen, let us act! Time is 
most precious " 

The Emperor ceased speaking, the crowd 
began pressing round him, and rapturous ex- 
clamations were heard from all sides. 

"Yes, most precious ... a royal word," said 
Count Rost6v, with a sob. Hestood at the back, 
and, though he had heard hardly anything, un- 
derstood everything in his own way. 

From the hall of the nobility the Emperor 
went to that of the merchants. There he re- 
mained about ten minutes. Pierre was among 
those who saw him come out from the mer- 
chants' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes. 
As became known later, he had scarcely begun 
to address the merchants before tears gushed 
from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling 
voice. When Pierre saw the Emperor he was 
coming out accompanied by two merchants, 
one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchik. 1 
The other was the mayor, a man with a thin 
sallow face and narrow beard. Both were weep- 
ing. Tears filled the thin man's eyes, and the 
fat otkupshchik sobbed outright like a child 
and kept repeating: 

"Our lives and property take them, Your 
Majesty!" 

Pierre's one feeling at the moment was a de- 
sire to show that he was ready to go all lengths 
and was prepared to sacrifice everything. He 
now felt ashamed of his speech with its consti- 
tutional tendency and sought an opportunity 
of effacing it. Having heard that Count Mam6- 
nov was furnishing a regiment, Beztikhov at 
once informed Rostopchfn that he would give 
a thousand men and their maintenance. 

*A dealer in spirits one who leased from the 
government the monopoly of the sale of spirits for 
a certain district.-Tn, 



388 WAR AND PEACE 

Old Rost6v could not tell his wife of what sembled nobles all took off their uniforms and 

had passed without tears, and at once con- settled down again in their homes and clubs, 

sented to P6tya's request and went himself to and not without some groans gave orders to 

enter his name. their stewards about the enrollment, feeling 

Next day the Emperor left Moscow, The as- amazed themselves at what they had done. 



Book Ten: 1812 



CHAPTER I 

NAPOLEON BEGAN the war with Russia because 
he could not resist going to Dresden, could not 
help having his head turned by the homage he 
received, could not help donning a Polish uni- 
form and yielding to the stimulating influence 
of a June morning, and could not refrain from 
bursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and 
then of Balashev. 

Alexander refused negotiations because he 
felt himself to be personally insulted. Barclay 
de Tolly tried to command the army in the 
best way, because he wished to fulfill his duty 
and earn fame as a great commander. Rostov 
charged the French because he could not re- 
strain his wish for a gallop across a level field; 
and in the same way the innumerable people 
who took part in the war acted in accord with 
their personal characteristics, habits, circum- 
stances, and aims. They were moved by fear or 
vanity, rejoiced or were indignant, reasoned, 
imagining that they knew what they were do- 
ing and did it of their own free will, but they 
all were involuntary tools of history, carrying 
on a work concealed from them but compre- 
hensible to us. Such is the inevitable fate of 
men of action, and the higher they stand in the 
social hierarchy the less are they free. 

The actors of 1812 have long since left the 
stage, their personal interests have vanished 
leaving no trace, anci nothing remains of that 
time but its historic results. 

Providence compelled all these men, striv- 
ing to attain personal aims, to further the ac- 
complishment of a stupendous result no one 
of them at all expected neither Napoleon, 
nor Alexander, nor still less any of those who 
did the actual fighting. 

The cause of the destruction of the French 
army in 1812 is clear to us now. No one will 
deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its 
advance into the heart of Russia late in the 
season without any preparation for a winter 
campaign and, on the 'other, the character giv- 
en to the war by the burning of Russian towns 



and the hatred of the foe this aroused among 
the Russian people. But no one at the time 
foresaw (what now seems so evident) that this 
was the only way an army of eight hundred 
thousand men the best in the world and led 
by the best general could be destroyed in con- 
flict with a raw army of half its numerical 
strength, and led by inexperienced command- 
ers as the Russian army was. Not only did no 
one see this, but on the Russian side every ef- 
fort was made to hinder the only thing that 
could save Russia, while on the French side, 
despite Napoleon's experience and so-called 
military genius, every effort was directed to 
pushing on to Moscow at the end of the sum- 
mer, that is, to doing the very thing that was 
bound to lead to destruction. 

In historical works on the year 1812 French 
writers are very fond of saying that Napoleon 
felt the danger of extending his line, that he 
sought a battle and that his marshals advised 
him to stop at Smolensk, and of making similar 
statements to show that the danger of the cam- 
paign was even then understood. Russian au- 
thors are still fonder of telling us that from the 
commencement of the campaign a Scythian 
war plan was adopted to lure Napoleon into 
the depths of Russia, and this plan some of 
them attribute to Pfuel, others to a certain 
Frenchman, others to Toll, and others again to 
Alexander himself pointing to notes, projects, 
and letters which contain hints of such a line 
of action. But all these hints at what happened, 
both from the French side and the Russian, 
are advanced only because they fit in with the 
event. Had that event not occurred these hints 
would have been forgotten, as we have forgot- 
ten the thousands and millions of hints and 
expectations to the contrary which were cur- 
rent then but have now been forgotten because 
the event falsified them. There are always so 
many conjectures as to the issue of any event 
that however it may end there will always be 
people to say: "I said then that it would be so/' 
quite forgetting that amid their innumerable 



389 



WAR AND PEACE 



conjectures many were to quite the contrary 
effect. 

Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of 
the danger of extending his line, and (on the 
Russian side) as to luring the enemy into the 
depths of Russia, are evidently of that kind, 
and only by much straining can historians at- 
tribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his 
marshals, or such plans to the Russian com- 
manders. All the facts are in flat contradiction 
to such conjectures. During the whole period 
of the war not only was there no wish on the 
Russian side to draw the French into the heart 
of the country, but from their first entry into 
Russia everything was done to stop them. And 
not only was Napoleon not afraid to extend 
his line, but he welcomed every step forward 
as a triumph and did not seek battle as eagerly 
as in former campaigns, but very lazily. 

At the very beginning of the war our armies 
were divided, and our sole aim was to unite 
them, though uniting the armies was no ad- 
vantage if we meant to retire and lure the en- 
emy into the depths of the country. Our Em- 
peror joined the army to encourage it to de- 
fend every inch of Russian soil and not to re- 
treat. The enormous Drissa camp was formed 
on Pfuel's plan, and there was no intention of 
retiring farther. The Emperor reproached the 
commanders in chief for every step they re- 
tired. He could not bear the idea of letting the 
enemy even reach Smolensk, still less could he 
contemplate the burning of Moscow, and 
when our armies did unite he was displeased 
that Smolensk was abandoned and burned 
without a general engagement having been 
fought under its walls. 

So thought the Emperor, and the Russian 
commanders and people were still more pro- 
voked at the thought that our forces were re- 
treating into the depths of the country. 

Napoleon having cut our armies apart ad- 
vanced far into the country and missed several 
chances of forcing an engagement. In August 
he was at Smolensk and thought only of how to 
advance farther, though as we now see that ad- 
vance was evidently ruinous to him. 

The facts clearly show that Napoleon did 
not foresee the danger of the advance on Mos- 
cow, nor did Alexander and the Russian com- 
manders then think of luring Napoleon on, 
but quite the contrary. The luring of Napo- 
leon into the depths of the country was not 
the result of any plan, for no one believed it to 
be possible; it resulted from a most complex 
interplay of intrigues, aims, and wishes among 



those who took part in the war and had no per- 
ception whatever of the inevitable, or of the 
one way of saving Russia. Everything came 
about fortuitously. The armies were divided at 
the commencement of the campaign. We tried 
to unite them, with the evident intention of 
giving battle and checking the enemy's ad- 
vance, and by this effort to unite them while 
avoiding battle with a much stronger enemy, 
and necessarily withdrawing the armies at an 
acute angle we led the French on to Smolensk. 
But we withdrew at an acute angle not only 
because the French advanced between our two 
armies; the angle became still more acute and 
we withdrew still farther, because Barclay de 
Tolly was an unpopular foreigner disliked by 
Bagrati6n (who would come under his com- 
mand), and Bagrati6n being in command of 
the second army tried to postpone joining up 
and coming under Barclay's command as long 
as he could. Bagration was slow in effecting 
the junction though that was the chief aim of 
all at headquarters because, as he alleged, he 
exposed his army to danger on this march, and 
it was best for him to retire more to the left 
and more to the south, worrying the enemy 
from flank and rear and securing from the 
Ukraine recruits for his army; and it looks as 
if he planned this in order not to come under 
the command of the detested foreigner Bar- 
clay, whose rank was inferior to his own. 

The Emperor was with the army to encour- 
age it, but his presence and ignorance of what 
steps to take, and the enormous number of ad- 
visers and plans, destroyed the first army's en- 
ergy and it retired. 

The intention was to make a stand at the 
Drissa camp, but Paulucci, aiming at becom- 
ing commander in chief, unexpectedly em- 
ployed his energy to influence Alexander, and 
Pfuel's whole plan was .abandoned and the 
command entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay 
did not inspire confidence his power was lim- 
ited. The armies were divided, there was no 
unity of command, and Barclay was unpopu- 
lar; but from this confusion, division, and the 
unpopularity of the foreign commander in 
chief, there resulted on the one hand indecision 
and the avoidance of a battle (which we could 
not have refrained from had the armies been 
united and had someone else, instead of Bar- 
clay, been in command) and on the other an 
ever-increasing indignation against the foreign- 
ers and an increase in patriotic zeal. 

At last the Emperor left the army, and as the 
most convenient and indeed the only pretext 



BOOK TEN 



for his departure it was decided that it was nec- 
essary for him to inspire the people in the 
capitals and arouse the nation in general to a 
patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperor 
to Moscow the strength of the Russian army 
was trebled. 

He left in order not to obstruct the com- 
mander in chief's undivided control of the 
army, and hoping that more decisive action 
would then be taken, but the command of the 
armies became still more contused and enfee- 
bled. Bennigsen, the Tsare*vich, and a swarm 
of adjutants general remained with the army 
to keep the commander in chief under obser- 
vation and arouse his energy, and Barclay, 
feeling less free than ever under the observa- 
tion of all these "eyes of the Emperor," be- 
came still more cautious of undertaking any 
decisive action and avoided giving battle. 

Barclay stood for caution. The Tsare*vich 
hinted at treachery and demanded a general 
engagement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, 
and the others of that group stirred up so much 
trouble that Barclay, under pretext of sending 
papers to the Emperor, dispatched these Polish 
adjutants general to Petersburg and plunged 
into an open struggle with Bennigsen and the 
TsareVich. 

At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, 
much as Bagrati6n disliked it. 

Bagrati6n drove up in a carriage to the house 
occupied by Barclay. Barclay donned his sash 
and came out to meet and report to his senior 
officer Bagrati6n. 

Despite his seniority in rank Bagrati6n, in 
this contest of magnanimity, took his orders 
from Barclay, but, having submitted, agreed 
with him less than ever. By the Emperor's or- 
ders Bagration reported direct to him. He 
wrote to Arakche'ev, the Emperor's confidant: 
"It must be as my sovereign pleases, but I can- 
not work with the Minister (meaning Barclay). 
For God's sake send me somewhere else if only 
in command of a regiment. I cannot stand it 
here. Headquarters are so full of Germans that 
a Russian cannot exist and there is no sense in 
anything. I thought I was really serving my sov- 
ereign and the Fatherland, but it turns out 
that I am serving Barclay. I confess I do not 
want to." 

The swarm of Bronnftskis and Wintzinge- 
rodes and their like still further embittered the 
relations between the commanders in chief, 
and even less unity resulted. Preparations were 
made to fight th Frencn before Smolensk. A 
general was sent to survey the position. This 



general, hating Barclay, rode to visit a friend 
of his own, a corps commander, and, having 
spent the day with him, returned to Barclay 
and condemned, as unsuitable from every point 
of view, the battleground he had not seen. 

While disputes and intrigues were going on 
about the future field of battle, and while we 
were looking for the French having lost touch 
with them the French stumbled upon Neve*- 
rovski's division and reached the walls of Smo- 
tensk. 

It was necessary to fight an unexpected bat- 
tle at Smolensk to save our lines of communi- 
cation. The battle was fought and thousands 
were killed on both sides. 

Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the 
wishes of the Emperor and of the whole peo- 
ple. But Smol6nsk was burned by its own in- 
habitants who had been misled by their gov.- 
ernor. And these ruined inhabitants, setting 
an example to other Russians, went to Moscow 
thinking only of their own losses but kindling 
hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther 
and we retired, thus arriving at the very result 
which caused his destruction. 

CHAPTER II 

THE DAY after his son had left, Prince Nicholas 
sent for Princess Mary to come to his study. 

"Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. 
"You've made me quarrel with my son! Satis- 
fied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied? 
... It hurts me, it hurts. I'm old and weak and 
this is what you wanted. Well then, gloat over 
it! Gloat over it!" 

After that Princess Mary did not see her fa- 
ther for a whole week. He was ill and did not 
leave his study. 

Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that 
during this illness the old prince not only ex- 
cluded her from his room, but did not admit 
Mademoiselle Bourienne either. Tikhon alone 
attended him. 

At the end of the week the prince reappeared 
and resumed his former way of life, devoting 
himself with special activity to building opera- 
tions and the arrangement of the gardens and 
completely breaking off his relations with 
Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold 
tone to his daughter seemed to say: "There, 
you see? You plotted against me, you lied to 
Prince Andrew about my relations with that 
Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him, 
but you see I need neither her nor you!" 

Princess Mary spent half of every day with 
little Nicholas, watching his lessons, teaching 



39* WAR AND PEACE 

him Russian and music herself, and talking to 
Dessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her 
books, with her old nurse, or with "God's folk" 
who sometimes came by the back door to see 
her. 

Of the war Princess Mary thought as women 
do think about wars. She feared for her brother 
who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at 
the strange cruelty that impels men to kill one 
another, but she did not understand the signif- 
icance of this war, which seemed to her like all 
previous wars. She did not realize the signifi- 
cance of this war, though Dessalles with whom 
she constantly conversed was passionately in- 
tereste&lt;J in its progress and tried to explain his 
own conception of it to her, and though the 
"God's folk" who came to see her reported, in 
their own way, the rumors current among the 
people of an invasion by Antichrist, and though 
Julie (now Princess Drubetskdya), who had re- 
sumed correspondence with her, wrote patri- 
otic letters from Moscow. 

"I write you in Russian, my good friend," 
wrote Julie in her Frenchified Russian, "be- 
cause I have a detestation for all the French, 
and the same for their language which I can- 
not support to hear spoken We in Moscow 

are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Em- 
peror. 

"My poor husband is enduring pains and 
hunger in Jewish taverns, but the news which 
I have inspires me yet more. 

"You heard probably of the heroic exploit 
of Rae* vski, embracing his two sons and saying: 
'I will perish with them but we will not be 
shaken!' And truly though the enemy was 
twice stronger than we, we were unshakable. 
We pass the time as we can, but in war as in 
war! The princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole 
days with me, and we, unhappy widows of live 
men, make beautiful conversations over our 
char pie, only you, my friend, are missing ..." 
and so on. 

The chief reason Princess Mary did not re- 
alize the full significance of this war was that 
the old prince never spoke of it, did not recog- 
nize it, and laughed at Dessalles when he men- 
tioned it at dinner. The prince's tone was so 
calm and confident that Princess Mary un- 
hesitatingly believed him. 

All that July the old prince was exceedingly 
active and even animated. He planned anoth- 
er garden and began a new building for the 
domestic serfs. The only thing that made Prin- 
cess Mary anxious about him was that he slept 
very little and, instead of sleeping in his study 



as usual, changed his sleeping place every day. 
One day he would order his camp bed to be 
set up in the glass gallery, another day he re- 
mained on the couch or on the lounge chair in 
the drawing room and dozed there without un- 
dressing, while instead of Mademoiselle Bou- 
rienne a serf boy read to him. Then again he 
would spend a night in the dining room. 

On August i, a second letter was received 
from Prince Andrew. In his first letter which 
came soon after he had left home, Prince An- 
drew had dutifully asked his father's forgive- 
ness for what he had allowed himself to say 
and begged to be restored to his favor. To this 
letter the old prince had replied affectionately, 
and from that time had kept the Frenchwom- 
an at a distance. Prince Andrew's second let- 
ter, written near Vitebsk after the French had 
occupied that town, gave a brief account of the 
whole campaign, enclosed for them a plan he 
had drawn and forecasts as to the further prog- 
ress of the war. In this letter Prince Andrew 
pointed out to his father the danger of staying 
at Bald Hills, so near the theater of war and on 
the army's direct line of march, and advised 
him to move to Moscow. 

At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mention- 
ing that the French were said to have already 
entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered 
his son's letter. 

"There was a letter from Prince Andrew to- 
day," he said to Princess Mary "Haven't you 
read it?" 

"No, Father," she replied in a frightened 
voice. 

She could not have read the letter as she did 
not even know it had arrived. 

"He writes about this war," said the prince, 
with the ironic smile that had become habitual 
to him in speaking of the present war. 

"That must be very interesting," said Des- 
salles. "Prince Andrew is in a position to 
know . . ." 

"Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle 
Bourienne. 

"Go and get it for me," said the old prince 
to Mademoiselle Bourienne. "You knowun- 
der the paperweight on the little table." 

Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up ea- 
gerly. 

"No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. 
"You go, Michael Ivdnovich." 

Michael Iv^novich rose and went to the 
study. But as soon as he had left the room the 
old prince, looking uneasily round, threw 
down his napkin and went himself. 



BOOK TEN 



393 



"They can't do anything . . . always make 
some muddle," he muttered. 

While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, 
Mademoiselle Bourienne, and even little Nich- 
olas exchanged looks in silence. The old prince 
returned with quick steps, accompanied by 
Michael Ivdnovich, bringing the letter and a 
plan. These he put down beside himnot let- 
ting anyone read them at dinner. 

On moving to the drawing room he handed 
the letter to Princess Mary and, spreading out 
before him the plan of the new building and 
fixing his eyes upon it, told her to read the let- 
ter aloud. When she had done so Princess 
Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He was 
examining the plan, evidently engrossed in his 
own ideas. 

"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles 
ventured to ask. 

"1? I? . . ." said the prince as if unpleasantly 
awakened, and not taking his eyes from the 
plan of the building. 

"Very possibly the theater of war will move 
so near to us that . . ." 

"Ha ha ha! The theater of warl" said the 
prince. "I have said and still say that the thea- 
ter of war is Poland and the enemy will never 
get beyond the Niemen." 

Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, 
who was talking of the Niemen when the en- 
emy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess 
Mary, forgetting the geographical position of 
the Niemen, thought that what her father was 
saying was correct. 

"When the snow melts they'll sink in the 
Polish swamps. Only they could fail to see it," 
the prince continued, evidently thinking of 
the campaign of 1807 which seemed to him so 
recent. "Bennigsen should have advanced in- 
to Prussia sooner, then things would have tak- 
en a different turn . . ." 

"But, Prince," Dessalles began timidly, "the 
letter mentions Vitebsk " 

"Ah, the letter? Yes . . ." replied the prince 
peevishly. "Yes ... yes .. ." His face suddenly 
took on a morose expression. He paused. "Yes, 
he writes that the French were beaten at ... at 
. . . what river is it?" 

Dessalles dropped his eyes. 

"The prince says nothing about that," he re- 
marked gently. 

"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself." 

No one spoke for a long time. 

"Yes ... yes .. .Well, Michael Ivdnovich," 
he suddenly went on, raising his head and 
pointing to the plan of the building, "tell me 



how you mean to alter it. . . ." 

Michael Ivdnovich went up to the plan, and 
the prince after speaking to him about the new 
building looked angrily at Princess Mary and 
Dessalles and went to his own room. 

Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed 
and astonished look fixed on her father, no- 
ticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that 
her father had forgotten his son's letter on the 
drawing-room table; but she was not only 
afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the rea- 
son of his confusion and silence, but was afraid 
even to think about it. 

In the evening Michael Ivdnovich, sent by 
the ptince, came to Princess Mary for Prince 
Andrew's letter which had been forgotten in 
the drawing room. She gave it to him and, un- 
pleasant as it was to her to do so, ventured to 
ask him what her father was doing. 

"Always busy," replied Michael Ivdnovich 
with a respectfully ironic smile which caused 
Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worrying 
very much about the new building. He has 
been reading a little, but now" Michael Ivan- 
ovich went on, lowering his voice "now he's 
at his desk, busy with his will, I expect." (One 
of the prince's favorite occupations of late had 
been the preparation of some papers he meant 
to leave at his death and which he called his 
"will.") 

"And Alpdtych is being sent to Smolensk?" 
asked Princess Mary. 

"Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for 
some time." 

CHAPTER III 

WHEN MICHAEL IVANOVICH returned to the 
study with the letter, the old prince, with spec- 
tacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sitting 
at his open bureau with screened candles, hold- 
ing a paper in his outstretched hand, and in a 
somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his 
manuscript his "Remarks" as he termed it 
which was to be transmitted to the Emperor 
after his death. 

When Michael Ivdnovich went in there were 
tears in the prince's eyes evoked by the memo- 
ry of the time when the paper he was now read- 
ing had been written. He took the letter from 
Michael Ivdnovich's hand, put it in his pocket, 
folded up his papers, and called in Alpdtych 
who had long been waiting. 

The prince had a list of things to be bought 
in Smolensk and, walking up and down the 
room past Alpdtych who stood by the door, he 
gave his instructions. 



394 WAR AND PEACE 

"First, notepaper do you hear? Eight quires, 
like this sample, gilt-edged ... it must be exact- 
ly like the sample. Varnish, sealing wax, as in 
Michael Ivdnovich's list." 

He paced up and down for a while and 
glanced at his notes. 

"Then hand to the governor in person a let- 
ter about the deed." 

Next, bolts for the doors of the new build- 
ing were wanted and had to be of a special 
shape the prince had himself designed, and a 
leather case had to be ordered to keep the 
"will" in. 

The instructions to Alpdtych took over two 
hours and still the prince did not let him go. 
He sat down, sank into thought, closed his eyes, 
and dozed off. Alpdtych made a slight move- 
ment. 

"Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted 
I'll send after you." 

Alpdtych went out. The prince again went 
to his bureau, glanced into it, fingered his pa- 
pers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at 
the table to write to the governor. 

It was already late when he rose after seal- 
ing the letter. He wished to sleep, but he knew 
he would not be able to and that most depress- 
ing thoughts came to him in bed. So he called 
Tikhon and went through the rooms with him 
to show him where to set up the bed for that 
night. 

He went about looking at every corner. 
Every place seemed unsatisfactory, but worst 
of all was his customary couch in the study. 
That couch was dreadful to him, probably be- 
cause of the oppressive thoughts he had had 
when lying there. It was unsatisfactory every- 
where, but the corner behind the piano in the 
sitting room was better than other places: he 
had never slept there yet. 

With the help of a footman Tfkhon brought 
in the bedstead and began putting it up. 

"That's not right! That's not right!" cried 
the prince, and himself pushed it a few inches 
from the corner and then closer in again. 

"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," 
thought the prince, and let Tikhon undress him. 

Frowning with vexation at the effort neces- 
sary to divest himself of his coat and trousers, 
the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the 
bed, and appeared to be meditating as he 
looked contemptuously at his withered yellow 
legs. He was not meditating, but only defer- 
ring the moment of making the effort to lift 
those legs up and turn over on the bed. "Ugh, 
how hard it is! Oh, that this toil might end and 



you would release me!" thought he. Pressing 
his lips together he made that effort for the 
twenty- thousandth time and lay down. But 
hardly had he done so before he felt the bed 
rocking backwards and forwards beneath him 
as if it were breathing heavily and jolting. This 
happened to him almost every night. He 
opened his eyes as they were closing. 

"No peace, damn them!" he muttered, an- 
gry he knew not with whom. "Ah yes, there was 
something else important, very important, 
that I was keeping till I should be in bed. The 
bolts? No, I told him about them. No, it was 
something, something in the drawing room. 
Princess Mary talked some nonsense. Dessalles, 
that fool, said something. Something in my 
pocketcan't remember. . . . 

"Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?" 

"About Prince Michael . . ." 

"Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his 
hand on the table. "Yes, I know, Prince An- 
drew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles 
said something about Vitebsk. Now I'll read 
it." 

He had the letter taken from his pocket 
and the table on which stood a glass of lem- 
onade and a spiral wax handle moved close 
to the bed, and putting on his spectacles he 
began reading. Only now in the stillness of the 
night, reading it by the faint light under the 
green shade, did he grasp its meaning for a 
moment. 

"The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march 
they may be at Smolensk; perhaps are already 
there! Tikhon!" Tfkhon jumped up. "No, no, 
I don't want anything!" he shouted. 

He put the letter under the candlestick and 
closed his eyes. And there rose before him the 
Danube at bright noonday: reeds, the Russian 
camp, and himself a young general without a 
wrinkle on his ruddy face, vigorous and alert, 
entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and a 
burning sense of jealousy of "the favorite" agi- 
tated him now as strongly as it had done then. 
He recalled all the words spoken at that first 
meeting with Potemkin. And he saw before 
him a plump, rather sallow-faced, short, stout 
woman, the Empress Mother, with her smile 
and her words at her first gracious reception of 
him, and then that same face on the catafalque, 
and the encounter he had with Ztibov over her 
coffin about his right to kiss her hand. 

"Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that 
time and have done with all the present! Quick- 
er, quicker and that they should leave me in 
peacel" 



BOOK 

CHAPTER IV 

BALD HILLS, Prince Nicholas Bolk6nski's es- 
tate, lay forty miles east from Smolensk and 
two miles from the main road to Moscow. 

The same evening that the prince gave his 
instructions to Alpatych, Dessalles, having 
asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as the 
prince was not very well and was taking no steps 
to secure his safety, though from Prince An- 
drew's letter it was evident that to remain at 
Bald Hills might be dangerous, he respectfully 
advised her to send a letter by Alpatych to the 
Provincial Governor at Smolensk, asking him . 
to let her know the state of affairs and the ex- 
tent of the danger to which Bald Hills was ex- 
posed. Dessalles wrote this letter to the Gover- 
nor for Princess Mary, she signed it, and it was 
given to Alpatych with instructions to hand it 
to the Governor and to come back as quickly 
as possible if there was danger. 

Having received all his orders Alpdtych, wear- 
ing a white beaver hat a present from the 
prince and carrying a stick as the prince did, 
went out accompanied by his family. Three 
well-fed roans stood ready harnessed to a small 
conveyance with a leather hood. 

The larger bell was muffled and the little bells 
on the harness stuffed with paper. The prince 
allowed no one at Bald Hills to drivewith ring- 
ing bells, but on a long journey Alpatych liked 
to have them. His satellites the senior clerk, 
a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid, a cook, 
two old women, a little pageboy, the coachman, 
and various domestic serfs were seeing him 
off. 

His daughter placed chintz-covered down 
cushions for him to sit on and behind his back. 
His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, 
and one of the coachmen helped him into the 
vehicle. 

"There! There! Women's fuss! Women, 
women!" said Alpatych, puffing and speaking 
rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed 
into the trap. 

After giving the clerk orders about the work 
to be done, Alpatych, not trying to imitate the 
prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head 
and crossed himself three times. 

"If there is anything . . . come back, Ydkov 
Alpdtych! For Christ's sake think of us!" cried 
his wife, referring to the rumors of war and the 
enemy. 

"Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered 
Alpdtych to himself and started on his journey, 
looking round at the fields of yellow rye and 
the still-green, thickly growing oats, and at oth- 



TEN 395 

er quite black fields just being plowed a second 
time. 

As he went along he looked with pleasure 
at the year's splendid crop of corn, scrutinized 
the strips of ryefield which here and there were 
already being reaped, made his calculations as 
to the sowing and the harvest, and asked him- 
self whether he had not forgotten any of the 
prince's orders. 

Having baited the horses twice on the way, 
he arrived at the town toward evening on the 
fourth of August. 

Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking bag- 
gage trains and troops on the road. As he ap- 
proached Smolensk he heard the sounds of dis- 
tant firing, but these did not impress him. 
What struck him most was the sight of a splen- 
did field of oats in which a camp had been 
pitched and which was being mown down by 
the soldiers, evidently for fodder. This fact 
impressed Alpdtych, but in thinking about his 
own business he soon forgot it. 

All the interests of his life for more than 
thirty years had been bounded by the will of 
the prince, and he never went beyond that 
limit. Everything not connected with the exe- 
cution of the prince's orders did not interest 
and did not even exist for Alpdtych. 

On reaching Smolensk on the evening of 
the fourth of August he put up in the Gdchina 
suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by 
Ferap6ntov, where he had been in the habit of 
putting up for the last thirty years. Some thirty 
years ago Ferap6ntov, by Alpatych's advice, had 
bought a wood from the prince, had begun to 
trade, and now had a house, an inn, and a corn 
dealer's shop in that province. He was a stout, 
dark, red-faced peasant in the forties, with 
thick lips, a broad knob of a nose, similar knobs 
over his black frowning brows, and a round 
belly. 

Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, 
Ferap6ntov was standing before his shop which 
opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych he 
went up to him. 

"You're welcome, Ydkov Alpdtych. Folks are 
leaving the town, but you have come to it," 
said he. 

"Why are they leaving the town?" asked Al- 
ptych. 

"That's what I say. Folks are foolish! Always 
afraid of the French." 

"Women's fuss, women's fuss!" said Alpdtych. 

"Just what I think, Ydkov Alpdtych. What I 
say is: orders have been given not to let them in, 
so that must be right. And the peasants are ask- 



396 



WAR AND PEACE 



ing three rubles for carting it isn't Christian!" 

Yakov Alpdtych heard without heeding. He 
asked for a samovar and for hay for his horses, 
and when he had had his tea he went to bed. 

All night long troops were moving past the 
inn. Next morning Alpdtych donned a jacket 
he wore only in town and went out on business. 
It was a sunny morning and by eight o'clock 
it was already hot. "A good day for harvesting," 
thought Alpatych. 

From beyond the town firing had been heard 
since earlymorning. At eight o'clock the boom- 
ing of cannon was added to the sound of mus- 
ketry. Many people were hurrying through the 
streets and there were many soldiers, but cabs 
were still driving about, tradesmen stood at 
their shops, and service was being held in the 
churches as usual. Alpitych went to the shops, 
to government offices, to the post office, and to 
the Governor's. In the offices and shops and at 
the post office everyone was talking about the 
army and about the enemy who was already at- 
tacking the town, everybody was asking what 
should be done, and all were trying to calm one 
another. 

In front of the Governor's house Alpitych 
found a large number of people, Cossacks, and 
a traveling carriage of the Governor's. At the 
porch he met two of the landed gentry, one of 
whom he knew. This man, an ex-captain of 
police, was saying angrily: 

"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if 
you're single. 'One man though undone is but 
one/ as the proverb says, but with thirteen in 
your family and all the property . . . They've 
brought us to utter ruin! What sort of gover- 
nors are they to do that? They ought to be 
hanged the brigands! . . ." 

"Oh come, that's enough!" said the other. 

"What do I care? Let him hear! We're not 
dogs," said the ex-captain of police, and look- 
ing round he noticed Alpdtych. 

"Oh, Ydkov Alpatych! What have you come 
for?" 

"To see the Governor by his excellency's or- 
der," answered Alpdtych, lifting his head and 
proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of 
his coat as he always did when he mentioned 

the prince "He has ordered me to inquire 

into the position of affairs," he added. 

"Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry 
gentleman. "They've brought things to such a 
pass that there are no carts or anything! . . . 
There it is again, do you hear?" said he, point- 
ing in the direction whence came the sounds of 
firing. 



"They've brought us all to ruin . . . the brig- 
ands!" he repeated, and descended the porch 
steps. 

Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. 
In the waiting room were tradesmen, women, 
and officials, looking silently at one another. 
The door of the Governor's room opened and 
they all rose and moved forward. An official 
ran out, said some words to a merchant, called 
a stout official with a cross hanging on his neck 
to follow him, and vanished again, evidently 
wishing to avoid the inquiring looks and ques- 
tions addressed to him. Alpatych moved for- 
ward and next time the official came out ad- 
dressed him, one hand placed in the breast of 
his buttoned coat, and handed him two letters. 

"To his Honor Baron Asch, from General-in- 
Chief Prince Bolk6nski," he announced with 
such solemnity and significance that the official 
turned to him and took the letters. 

A few minutes later the Governor received 
Alpatych and hurriedly said to him: 

"Inform the prince and princess that I knew 
nothing: I acted on the highest instructions 
here . . ." and he handed a paper to Alpdtych. 
"Still, as the prince is unwell my advice is that 
they should go to Moscow. I am just starting 
myself. Inform them ..." 

But the Governor did not finish: a dusty per- 
spiring officer ran into the room and began to 
say something in French. The Governor's face 
expressed terror. 

"Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpdtych, 
and began questioning the officer. 

Eager, frightened, helpless glances were 
turned on Alpdtych when he came out of the 
Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now 
to the firing, which had drawn nearer and was 
increasing in strength, Alpdtych hurried to his 
inn. The paper handed to him by the Govern- 
or said this: 

"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not 
in the slightest danger as yet and it is unlikely that 
it will be threatened with any. I from the one side 
and Prince Bagrati6n from the other are marching 
to unite our forces before Smolensk, which junction 
will be effected on the 22nd instant, and both ar- 
mies with their united forces will defend our com- 
patriots of the province entrusted to your care till 
our efforts shall have beaten back the enemies of 
our Fatherland, or till the last warrior in our val- 
iant ranks has perished. From this you will see that 
you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants 
of Smolensk, for those defended by two such brave 
armies may feel assured of victory." (Instructions 
from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch, the civil 
governor of Smolensk, 1812.) 



BOOK TEN 



397 



People were anxiously roaming about the 
streets. 

Carts piled high with household utensils, 
chairs, and cupboards kept emerging from the 
gates of the yards and moving along the streets. 
Loaded carts stood at the house next to Fera- 
p6ntov's and women were wailing and lament- 
ing as they said good-by. A small watchdog 
ran round barking in front of the harnessed 
horses. 

Alpdtych entered the innyard at a quicker 
pace than usual and went straight to the shed 
where his horses and trap were. The coachman 
was asleep. He woke him up, told him to har- 
ness, and went into the passage. From the host's 
room came the sounds of a child crying, the de- 
spairing sobs of a woman, and the hoarse an- 
gry shouting of Ferap6ntov. The cook began 
running hither and thither in the passage like 
a frightened hen, just as Alpdtych entered. 

"He's done her to death. Killed the mistressl 
. . . Beat her . . . dragged her about so! ..." 

"What for?" asked Alpdtych. 

"She kept begging to go away. She's a wom- 
an! 'Take me away,' says she, 'don't let me 
perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 
'are all gone, so why,' she says, 'don't we go?' 
And he began beating and pulling her about 
so!" 

At these words Alpdtych nodded as if in ap- 
proval, and not wishing to hear more went to 
the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, 
where he had left his purchases. 

"You brute, you murderer! "screamed a thin, 
pale woman who, with a baby in her arms and 
her kerchief torn from her head, burst through 
the door at that moment and down the steps 
into the yard. 

Ferap6ntov came out after her, but on see- 
ing Alpdtych adjusted his waistcoat, smoothed 
his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into 
the opposite room. 

"Going already?" said he. 

Alpdtych, without answering or looking at 
his host, sorted his packages and asked how 
much he owed. 

"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to 
the Governor's?" asked Ferap6ntov. "What has 
been decided?" 

Alpdtych replied that the Governor had not 
told him anything definite. 

"With our business, how can we get away?" 
said Ferap6ntov. "We'd have to pay seven ru- 
bles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell them 
they're not Christians to ask iti Selivdnov, now, 
did a good stroke last Thursdaysold flour to 



the army at nine rubles a sack. Will you have 
some tea?" he added. 

While the horses were being harnessed Al- 
patych and Ferap6ntov over their tea talked of 
the price of corn, the crops, and the good weath- 
er for harvesting. 

"Well, it seems to be getting quieter," re- 
marked Ferap6ntov, finishing his third cup of 
tea and getting up. "Ours must have got the 
best of it. The orders were not to let them in. 
So we're in force, it seems. . . . They say the 
other day Matthew Ivdnych Pldtov * drove them 
into the river Mdrina and drowned some eight- 
een thousand in one day." 

Alpjitych collected his parcels, handed them 
to the coachman who had come in, and settled 
up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, 
hoofs, and bells was heard from the gateway as 
a little trap passed out. 

It was by now late in the afternoon. Half 
the street was in shadow, the other half bright- 
ly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of the 
window and went to the door. Suddenly the 
strange sound of a far-off whistling and thud 
was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blend- 
ing into a dull roar that set the windows rat- 
tling. 

He went out into the street: two men were 
running past toward the bridge. From different 
sides came whistling sounds and the thud of 
cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the 
town. But these sounds were hardly heard in 
comparison with the noise of the firing outside 
the town and attracted little attention from 
the inhabitants. The town was being bombard- 
ed by a hundred and thirty guns which Napo- 
leon had ordered up after four o'clock. The 
people did not at once realize the meaning of 
this bombardment. 

At first the noise of the falling bombs and 
shells only aroused curiosity. Ferap6ntov's 
wife, who till then had not ceased wailing un- 
der the shed, became quiet and with the baby 
in her arms went to the gate, listening to the 
sounds and looking in silence at the people. 

The cook and a shop assistant came to the 
gate. With lively curiosity everyone tried to 
get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew 
over their heads. Several people came round 
the corner talking eagerly. 

"What force!" remarked one. "Knocked the 
roof and ceiling all to splinters!" 

"Routed up the earth like a pig," said an- 
other. 

"That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed 

1 Hetman of the Cossack army. TR. 



398 



WAR AND PEACE 



the first. "Lucky you jumped aside, or it would 
have wiped you out!" 

Others joined those men and stopped and 
told how cannon balls had fallen on a house 
close to them. Mean while still more projectiles, 
now with the swift sinister whistle of a cannon 
ball, now with the agreeable intermittent whis- 
tle of a shell, flew over people's heads incessant- 
ly, but not one fell close by, they all flew over. 
Alpdtych was getting into his trap. The inn- 
keeper stood at the gate. 

"What are you staring at?" he shouted to the 
cook, who in her red skirt, with sleeves rolled 
up, swinging her bare elbows, had stepped to 
the corner to listen to what was being said. 

"What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearing 
her master's voice she turned back, pulling 
down her tucked-up skirt. 

Once moresomethingwhistled, but this time 
quite close, swooping downwards like a little 
bird; a flame flashed in the middle of the street, 
something exploded, and the street was shroud- 
ed in smoke. 

"Scoundrel, what are you doing?" shouted 
the innkeeper, rushing to the cook. 

At that moment the pitiful wailing of wom- 
en was heard from different sides, the fright- 
ened baby began to cry, and people crowded 
silently with pale faces round the cook. The 
loudest sound in that crowd was her wailing. 

"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't 
let me die! My good souls! . . ." 

Five minutes later no one remained in the 
street. The cook, with her thigh broken by a 
shell splinter, had been carried into the kitch- 
en. Alpdtych, his coachman, Ferap6ntov's wife 
and children and the house porter were all sit- 
ting in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns, 
the whistling of projectiles, and the piteous 
moaning of the cook, which rose above the oth- 
er sounds, did not cease fora moment. The mis- 
tress rocked and hushed her baby and when 
anyone came into the cellar asked in a pathetic 
whisper what had become of her husband who 
had remained in the street. A shopman who 
entered told her that her husband had gone 
with others to the cathedral, whence they were 
fetching the wonder-working icon of Smolensk. 

Toward dusk the cannonade began to sub- 
side. Alpdtych left the cellar and stopped in the 
doorway. The evening sky that had been so 
clear was clouded with smoke, through which, 
high up, the sickle of the new moon shone 
strangely. Now that the terrible din of the guns 
had ceased a hush seemed to reign over the 
town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps, 



the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle 
of fires which seemed widespread everywhere. 
The cook's moans had now subsided. On two 
sides black curling clouds of smoke rose and 
spread from the fires. Through the streets sol- 
diers in various uniforms walked or ran con- 
fusedly in different directions like ants from a 
ruined ant-hill. Several of them ran into Fera- 
pontov's yard before Alpdtych's eyes. Alpdtych 
went out to the gate. A retreating regiment, 
thronging and hurrying, blocked the street. 

Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is 
being abandoned. Get away, get away!" and 
then, turning to the soldiers, shouted: 

"I'll teach you to run into the yards!" 

Alpdtych went back to the house, called the 
coachman, and told him to set off. Ferap6ntov's 
whole household came out too, following Al- 
pdtych and the coachman. The women, who 
had been silent till then, suddenly began to 
wail as they looked at the fires the smoke and 
even the flames of which could be seen in the 
failing twilight and as if in reply the same 
kind of lamentation was heard from other parts 
of the street. Inside the shed Alpdtych and the 
coachman arranged the tangled reins and traces 
of their horses with trembling hands. 

As Alpdtych was driving out of the gate he 
saw some ten soldiers in Ferapontov's open 
shop, talking loudly and filling their bags and 
knapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds. Just 
then Ferapontov returned and entered his shop. 
On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout 
at them, but suddenly stopped and, clutching 
at his hair, burst into sobs and laughter: 

"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils 
get it!" he cried, taking some bags of flour him- 
self and throwing them into the street. 

Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran 
away, others went on filling their bags. On see- 
ing Alpdtych, FerapcSntov turned to him: 

"Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpdtych, 
I'll set the place on fire myself. We're done 
for! . . ." and Ferap6ntov ran into the yard. 

Soldiers were passing in a constant stream 
along the street blocking it completely, so that 
Alpdtych could not pass out and had to wait. 
Ferap6ntov's wife and children were also sit- 
ting in a cart waiting till it was possible to drive 
out. 

Night had come. There were stars in the sky 
and the new moon shone out amid the smoke 
that screened it. On the sloping descent to the 
Dnieper Alpdtych's cart and that of the inn- 
keeper's wife, which were slowly moving amid 
the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles, had 



BOOK TEN 



399 



to stop. In a side street near the crossroads 
where the vehicles had stopped, a house ariti 
some shops were on fire. This fire was already 
burning itself out. The flames now died down 
and were lost in the black smoke, now sudden- 
ly flared up again brightly, lighting up with 
strange distinctness the faces of the people 
crowding at the crossroads. Black figures flit- 
ted about before the fire, and through the in- 
cessant crackling of the flames talking and 
shouting could be heard. Seeing that his trap 
would not be able to move on for some time, 
Alpdtych got down and turned into the side 
street to look at the fire. Soldiers were contin- 
ually rushing backwards and forwards near it, 
and he saw two of them and a man in a frieze 
coat dragging burning beams in to another yard 
across the street, while others carried bundles 
of hay. 

Alpdtych went up to a large crowd standing 
before a high barn which was blazing briskly. 
The walls were all on fire and the back wall had 
fallen in, the wooden roof was collapsing, and 
the rafters were alight. The crowd was evident- 
ly watching for thereof to fall in, and Alpdtych 
watched for it too. 

"Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed 
the old man. 

"Mercy on us! Your excellency!" answered 
Alpatych, immediately recognizing the voice 
of his young prince. 

Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted 
on a black horse, was looking at Alpatych from 
the back of the crowd. 

"Why are you here?" he asked. 

"Your . . . your excellency," stammered Al- 
pdtych and broke into sobs. "Are we really 
lost? Master! . . ." 

"Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeat- 
ed. 

At that moment the flames flared up and 
showed his young master's pale worn face. Al- 
pdtych told how he had been sent there and 
how difficult it was to get away. 

"Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" 
he asked again. 

Prince Andrew without replying took out 
a notebook and raising his knee began writing 
in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to 
his sister: 

"Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will 
be occupied by the enemy within a week. Set off 
immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once 
when you will start. Send by special messenger to 
Usvydzh." 

Having written this and given the paper to 



Alpdtych, he told him how to arrange for the 
departure of the prince, the princess, his son, 
and the boy's tutor, and how and where to let 
him know immediately. Before he had had time 
to finish giving these instructions, a chief of 
staff followed by a suite galloped up to him. 

"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of 
staff with a German accent, in a voice familiar 
to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set on fire in 
your presence and you stand by! What does 
this mean? You will answer for it!" shouted 
Berg, who was now assistant to the chief of 
staff of the commander of the left flank of the 
infantry of the first army, a place, as Berg said, 
"very agreeable and well en Evidence." 

Prince Andrew looked at him and without 
replying went on speaking to Alpdtych. 

"So tell them that I shall await a reply till 
the tenth, and if by the tenth I don't receive 
news that they have all got away I shall have to 
throw up everything and come myself to Bald 
Hills." 

"Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince An- 
drew, "I only spoke because I have to obey or- 
ders, because I always do obey exactly You 

must please excuse me," he went on apologet- 
ically. 

Something cracked in the flames. The fire 
died down for a moment and wreaths of black 
smoke rolled from under the roof. There was 
another terrible crash and something huge col- 
lapsed. 

"Ou-rou-rou!" yelled the crowd, echoing the 
crash of the collapsing roof of the barn, the 
burning grain in which diffused a cakelike 
aroma all around. The flames flared up again, 
lighting the animated, delighted, exhausted 
faces of the spectators. 

The man in the frieze coat raised his arms 
and shouted: 

"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging . . . It's fine!" 

"That's the owner himself," cried several 
voices. 

"Well then," continued Prince Andrew to 
Alpdtych, "report to them as I have told you"; 
and not replying a word to Berg who was now 
mute beside him, he touched his horse and rode 
down the side street. 

CHAPTER V 

FROM SMOLENSK the troops continued to re- 
treat, followed by the enemy. On the tenth of 
August the regiment Prince Andrew command- 
ed was marching along the highroad past the 
avenue leading to Bald Hills. Heat and drought 
had continued for more than three weeks. 



4&lt;x&gt; 

Each day fleecy clouds floated across the sky 
and occasionally veiled the sun, but toward 
evening the sky cleared again and the sun set 
in reddish-brown mist. Heavy night dews alone 
refreshed the earth. The unreaped corn was 
scorched and shed its grain. The marshes dried 
up. The cattle lowed from hunger, finding no 
food on the sun-parched meadows. Only at 
night and in the forests while the dew lasted 
was there any freshness. But on the road, the 
highroad along which the troops marched, 
there was no such freshness even at night or 
when the road passed through the forest; the 
dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust 
churned up more than six inches deep. As soon 
as day dawned the march began. The artillery 
and baggage wagons moved noiselessly through 
the deep dust that rose to the very hubs of the 
wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in 
that soft, choking, hot dust that never cooled 
even at night. Some of this dust was kneaded 
by the feet and wheels, while the rest rose and 
hung like a cloud over the troops, settling in 
eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and worst of all in 
the lungs of the men and beasts as they moved 
along that road. The higher the sun rose the 
higher rose that cloud of dust, and through the 
screen of its hot fine particles one could look 
with naked eye at the sun, which showed like 
a huge crimson ball in the unclouded sky. 
There was no wind, and the men choked in 
that motionless atmosphere. They marched 
with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and 
mouths. When they passed through a village 
they all rushed to the wells and fought for the 
water and drank 't down to the mud. 

Prince Andrew was in command of a regi- 
ment, and the management of that regiment, 
the welfare of the men and the necessity of re- 
ceiving and giving orders, engrossed him. The 
burning of Smolensk and its abandonment 
made an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of 
anger against the foe made him forget his own 
sorrow. He was entirely devoted to the affairs 
of his regiment and was considerate and kind 
to his men and officers. In the regiment they 
called him "our prince," were proud of him 
and loved him. But he was kind and gentle on- 
ly to those of his regiment, to Tim6khin and 
the like people quite new to him, belonging 
to a different world and who could not know 
and understand his past. As soon as he came 
across a former acquaintance or anyone from 
the staff, he bristled up immediately and grew 
spiteful, ironical, and contemptuous. Every- 
thing that reminded him of his past was repug- 



WAR AND PEACE 

nant to him, and so in his relations with that 
fdriner circle he confined himself to trying to 
do his duty and not to be unfair. 

In truth everything presented itself in a dark 
and gloomy light to Prince Andrew, especially 
after the abandonment of Smolensk on the 
sixth of August (he considered that it could 
and should have been defended) and after his 
sick father had had to flee to Moscow, abandon- 
ing to pillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills 
which he had built and peopled. But despite 
this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrew had 
something to think about entirely apart from 
general questions. Two days previously he had 
received news that his father, son, and sister 
had left for Moscow; and though there was 
nothing for him to do at Bald Hills, Prince An- 
drew with a characteristic desire to foment his 
own grief decided that he must ride there. 

He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leav- 
ing his regiment on the march, rode to his fa- 
ther's estate where he had been born and spent 
his childhood. Riding past the pond where 
there used always to be dozens of women chat- 
tering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with 
wooden beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that 
there was not a soul about and that the little 
washing wharf, torn from its place and half sub- 
merged, was floating on its side in the middle 
of the pond. He rode to the keeper's lodge. No 
one was at the stone entrance gates of the drive 
and the door stood open. Grass had already be- 
gun to grow on the garden paths, and horses 
and calves were straying in the English park. 
Prince Andrew rode up to the hothouse; some 
of the glass panes were broken, and of the trees 
in tubs some were overturned and others dried 
up. He called for Tards the gardener, but no 
one replied. Having gone round the corner of 
the hothouse to the ornamental garden, he saw 
that the carved garden fence was broken and 
branches of the plum trees had been torn off 
with the fruit. An old peasant whom Prince 
Andrew in his childhood had often seen at the 
gate was sitting on a green garden seat, plait- 
ing a bast shoe. 

He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew 
ride up. He was sitting on the seat the old 
prince used to like to sit on, and beside him 
strips of bast were hanging on the broken and 
withered branch of a magnolia. 

Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Sev- 
eral limes in the old garden had been cut down 
and a piebald mare and her foal were wander- 
ing in front of the house among the rosebushes. 
The shutters were all closed, except at one 



BOOK TEN 



401 



window which was open. A little serf boy, see- 
ing Prince Andrew, ran into the house. Al- 
pdtych, having sent his family away, was alone 
at Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading 
the Lives of the Saints. On hearing that Prince 
Andrew had come, he went out with his spec- 
tacles on his nose, buttoning his coat, and, hast- 
ily stepping up, without a word began weeping 
and kissing Prince Andrew's knee. 

Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned 
away and began to report on the position of af- 
fairs. Everything precious and valuable had 
been removed to Bogucharovo. Seventy quar- 
ters of grain had also been carted away. The 
hay and the spring corn, of which Alpdtych 
said there had been a remarkable crop that 
year, had been commandeered by the troops 
and mown down while still green. The peas- 
ants were ruined; some of them too had gone 
to Bogucharovo, only a few remained. 

Without waiting to hear him out, Prince An- 
drew asked: 

"When did my father and sister leave?" 
meaning when did they leave for Moscow. 

Alpatych, understanding the question to re- 
fer to their departure for Boguchdrovo, re- 
plied that they had left on the seventh and 
again went into details concerning the estate 
management, asking for instructions. 

"Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to 
take a receipt for them? We have still six hun- 
dred quarters left," he inquired. 

"What am I to say to him?" thought Prince 
Andrew, looking down on the old man's bald 
head shining in the sun and seeing by the ex- 
pression on his face that the old man himself 
understood how untimely such questions were 
and only asked them to allay his grief. 

"Yes, let them have it," replied Prince An- 
drew. 

"If you noticed some disorder in the garden," 
said Alpdtych, "it was impossible to prevent it. 
Three regiments have been here and spent the 
night, dragoons mostly. I took down the name 
and rank of their commanding officer, to hand 
in a complaint about it." 

"Well, and what are you going to do? Will 
you stay here if the enemy occupies the place?" 
asked Prince Andrew. 

Alpdtych turned his face to Prince Andrew, 
looked at him, and suddenly with a solemn 
gesture raised his arm. 

"He is my refuge! His will be donel" he ex- 
claimed. 

A group of bareheaded peasants was ap- 
proaching across the meadow toward the prince. 



"Well, good-byl" said Prince Andrew, bend- 
ing over to Alpdtych. "You must go away too, 
take away what you can and tell the serfs to go 
to the Ryazdn estate or to the one near Mos- 
cow." 

Alpdtych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and 
burst into sobs. Gently disengaging himself, 
the prince spurred his horse and rode down the 
avenue at a gallop. 

The old man was still sitting in the orna- 
mental garden, like a fly impassive on the face 
of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last on 
which he was making the bast shoe, and two 
littlegirls, running out from the hothouse carry- 
ing in their skirts plums they had plucked from 
the trees there, came upon Prince Andrew. On 
seeing the young master, the elder one with 
frightened look clutched her younger compan- 
ion by the hand and hid with her behind a birch 
tree, not stopping to pick up some green plums 
they had dropped. 

Prince Andrew turned away with startled 
haste, unwilling to let them see that they had 
been observed. He was sorry for the pretty 
frightened little girl, was afraid of looking at 
her, and yet felt an irresistible desire to do so. 
A new sensation of comfort and relief came 
over him when, seeing these girls, he realized 
the existence of other human interests entirely 
aloof from his own and just as legitimate as 
those that occupied him. Evidently these girls 
passionately desired one thing to carry away 
and eat those green plums without being caught 
and Prince Andrew shared their wish for the 
success of their enterprise. He could not resist 
looking at them once more. Believing their 
danger past, they sprang from their ambush 
and, chirruping something in their shrill little 
voices and holding up their skirts, their bare 
little sunburned feet scampered merrily and 
quickly across the meadow grass. 

Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by 
having ridden off the dusty highroad along 
which the troops were moving. But not far 
from Bald Hills he again came out on the road 
and overtook his regiment at its halting place 
by the dam of a small pond. It was past one 
o'clock. The sun, a red ball through the dust, 
burned and scorched his back intolerably 
through his black coat. The dust always hung 
motionless above the buzz of talk that came 
from the resting troops. There was no wind. 
As he crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled 
the ooze and freshness of the pond. He longed 
to get into that water, however dirty it might 
be, and he glanced round at the pool from 



40? 



WAR AND PEACE 



whence came sounds of shrieks and laughter. 
The small, muddy, green pond had risen vis- 
ibly more than a foot, flooding the dam, be- 
cause it was full of the naked white bodies of 
soldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, 
who were splashing about in it. All this naked 
white human flesh, laughing and shrieking, 
floundered about in that dirty pool like carp 
stuffed into a watering can, and the suggestion 
of merriment in that floundering mass rendered 
it specially pathetic. 

One fair-haired young soldier of the third 
company, whom Prince Andrew knew and 
who had a strap round the calf of one leg, 
crossed himself, stepped back to get a good run, 
and plunged into the water; another, a dark 
noncommissioned officer who was always shag- 
gy, stood up to his waist in the water joyfully 
wriggling his muscular figure and snorted with 
satisfaction as he poured the water over his 
head with hands blackened to the wrists. There 
were sounds of men slapping one another, 
yelling, and puffing. 

Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and 
in the pond, there was healthy, white, muscu- 
lar flesh. The officer, Tim6khin, with his red 
little nose, standing on the dam wiping himself 
with a towel, felt confused at seeing the prince, 
but made up his mind to address him neverthe- 
less. 

"It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't 
you like to?" said he. 

"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making 
a grimace. 

"We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said 
Tim6khin, and, still undressed, ran off to clear 
the men out of the pond. 

"The prince wants to bathe." 

"What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and 
the men were in such haste to clear out that the 
prince could hardly stop them. He decided that 
he would rather souse himself with water in the 
barn. 

"Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thought, 
and he looked at his own naked body and shud- 
dered, not from cold but from a sense of dis- 
gust and horror he did not himself understand, 
aroused by the sight of that immense number 
of bodies splashing about in the dirty pond. 

On the seventh of August Prince Bagrati6n 
wrote as follows from his quarters at Mikhay- 
lovka on the Smolensk road: 

Dear Count Alexis Andrevich (He was writ- 
ing to Arakche'ev but knew that his letter would be 
read by the Emperor, and therefore weighed every 



word in it to the best of his ability.) 

I expect the Minister [Barclay de Tolly] has al- 
ready reported the abandonment of Smolensk to 
the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and the whole 
army is in despair that this most important place 
has been wantonly abandoned. I, for my part, 
begged him personally most urgently and finally 
wrote him, but nothing would induce him to con- 
sent. I swear to you on my honor that Napoleon 
was in such a fix as never before and might have 
lost half his army but could not have taken Smo- 
le"nsk. Our troops fought, and are fighting, as 
never before. With fifteen thousand men I held 
the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and beat 
him; but he would not hold out even for fourteen 
hours. It is disgraceful, a stain on our army, and 
as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. If 
he reports that our losses were great, it is not true; 
perhaps about four thousand, not more, and not 
even that; but even were they ten thousand, that's 
war! But the enemy has lost masses. . . . 

What would it have cost him to hold out for 
another two days? They would have had to retire 
of their own accord, for they had no water for men 
or horses. He gave me his word he would not re- 
treat, but suddenly sent instructions that he was 
retiring that night. We cannot fight in this way, 
or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow. . . . 

There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. 
God forbid that you should make peace after all 
our sacrifices and such insane retreats! You would 
set all Russia against you and every one of us 
would feel ashamed to wear the uniform. If it has 
come to this we must fight as long as Russia can 
and as long as there are men able to stand. . . . 

One man ought to be in command, and not two. 
Your Minister may perhaps be good as a Minister, 
but as a general he is not merely bad but execra- 
ble, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole 
country. ... I am really frantic with vexation; for- 
give my writing boldly. It is clear that the man 
who advocates the conclusion of a peace, and that 
the Minister should command the army, does not 
love our sovereign and desires the ruin of us all. 
So I write you frankly: call out the militia. For the 
Minister is leading these visitors after him to Mos- 
cow in a most masterly way. The whole army feels 
great suspicion of the Imperial aide-de-camp Wol- 
zogen. He is said to be more Napoleon's man than 
oui-s, and he is always advising the Minister. I am 
not merely civil to him but obey him like a cor- 
poral, though I am his senior. This is painful, but, 
loving my benefactor and sovereign,! submit. Only 
I am sorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our 
fine army to such as he. Consider that on our re- 
treat we have lost by fatigue and left in the hos- 
pital more than fifteen thousand men, and had 
we attacked this would not have happened. Tell 
me, for God's sake, what will Russia, our mother 
Russia, say to our being so frightened, and why 
are we abandoning our good and gallant Father- 
land to such rabble and implanting feelings of 



BOOK TEN 



403 



hatred and shame in all our subjects? What are 
we scared at and of whom are we afraid? I am not 
to blame that the Minister is vacillating, a coward, 
dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. The 
whole army bewails it and calls down curses upon 
him. . . . 

CHAPTER VI 

AMONG THE innumerable categories applicable 
to the phenomena of human life one may dis- 
criminate between those in which substance 
prevails and those in which form prevails. To 
the latter as distinguished from village, coun- 
try, provincial, or even Moscow lifewe may 
allot Petersburg life, and especially the life of 
its salons. That life of the salons is unchanging. 
Since the year 1805 we had made peace and had 
again quarreled with Bonaparte and had made 
constitutions and unmade them again, but the 
salons of Anna Pavlovnaand Helene remained 
just as they had been the one seven and the 
other five years before. At Anna Pavlovna's 
they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte's suc- 
cesses just as before and saw in them and in 
the subservience shown to him by the European 
sovereigns a malicious conspiracy, the sole ob- 
ject of which was to cause unpleasantness and 
anxiety to the court circle of which Anna Pav- 
lovna was the representative. And in Helene's 
salon, which Rumyantsev 1 himself honored 
with his visits, regarding He'lene as a remark- 
ably intelligent woman, they talked with the 
same ecstacy in 1812 as in 1808 of the "great 
nation" and the "great man,"andregrettedour 
rupture with France, a rupture which, accord- 
ing to them, ought to be promptly terminated 
by peace. 

Of late, since the Emperor's return from the 
army, there had been some excitement in these 
conflicting salon circles and some demonstra- 
tions of hostility to one another, but each camp 
retained its own tendency. In Anna Pavlovna's 
circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who 
were deep-rooted legitimists, and patriotic 
views were expressed to the effect that one 
ought not to go to the French theater and that 
to maintain the French troupe was costing the 
government as much as a whole army corps. 
The progress of the war was eagerly followed, 
and only the reports most flattering to our ar- 
my were circulated. In the French circle of He*- 
lene and Rumyantsev the reports of the cruel- 
ty of the enemy and of the war were contradict- 
ed and all Napoleon's attempts at conciliation 

1 Count N. P. Rumyantsev had been Minister of 
Foreign Affairs in 1807, and in 1809 became Chan- 
cellor. TR. 



were discussed. In that circle they discounte- 
nanced those who advised hurried preparations 
for a removal to Kazan of the court and the 
girls' educational establishments under the pa- 
tronage of the Dowager Empress. In Helena's 
circle the war in general was regarded as a se- 
ries of formal demonstrations which would very 
soon end in peace, and the view prevailed ex- 
pressed by BiHbin--whonow in Petersburg was 
quite at home in Helene's house, which every 
clever man was obliged to visit that not by 
gunpowder but by those who invented it would 
matters be settled. In that circle the Moscow 
enthusiasm news of which had reached Peters- 
burg simultaneously with the Emperor's re- 
turnwas ridiculed sarcastically and very clev- 
erly, though with much caution. 

Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was 
enraptured by this enthusiasm and spoke of it 
as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients. 
Prince Vasf li, who still occupied his former im- 
portant posts, formed a connecting link be- 
tween these two circles. He visited his "good 
friend Anna Pavlovna"aswell as his daughter's 
"diplomatic salon," and often in his constant 
comings and goings between the two camps be- 
came confused and said at Helene's what he 
should have said at Anna Pavlovna's and vice 
versa. 

Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Va- 
sili in a conversation about the war at Anna 
Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay de Tol- 
ly, but was undecided as to who ought to be 
appointed commander in chief. One of the 
visitors, usually spoken of as "a man of great 
merit," having described how he had that day 
seen Kutuzov, the newly chosen chief of the 
Petersburg militia, presiding over the enroll- 
ment of recruits at the Treasury, cautiously 
ventured to suggest that Kutuzov would be the 
man to satisfy all requirements. 

Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy 
smile that Kutuzov had done nothing but cause 
the Emperor annoyance. 

"I have talked and talked at the Assembly of 
the Nobility," Prince Vasili interrupted, "but 
they did not listen to me. I told them his elec- 
tion as chief of the militia would not please the 
Emperor. They did not listen to me. 

"It's all this mania for opposition," he went 
on. "And who for? It is all because we want to 
ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Musco- 
vites," Prince Vasili continued, forgetting for 
a moment that though at Helene's one had to 
ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pav- 
lovna's one had to be ecstatic about it. But he 



404 



WAR AND PEACE 



retrieved his mistake at once. "Now, is it suit- 
able that Count Kutuzov, the oldest general 
in Russia, should preside at that tribunal? He 
will get nothing for his pains! How could they 
make a man commander in chief who cannot 
mount a horse, who drops asleep at a council, 
and has the very worst morals 1 A good reputa- 
tion he made for himself at Bucharest! I don't 
speak of his capacity as a general, but at a time 
like this how can they appoint a decrepit, blind 
old man, positively blind? A fine idea to have 
a blind general! He can't see anything. To play 
blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!" 

No one replied to his remarks. 

This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth 
of July. But on the twenty-ninth of July Ku- 
tuzov received the title of Prince. This might 
indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore 
Prince Vasili's opinion continued to be correct 
though he was not now in any hurry to express 
it. But on the eighth of August a committee, 
consisting of Field Marshal Saltyk6v, Arak- 
chev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, and Kochuby 
met to consider the progress of the war. This 
commit tee came to the conclusion that our fail- 
ures were due to a want of unity in the com- 
mand and though the members of the commit- 
tee were aware of the Emperor's dislike of Ku- 
tuzov, after a short deliberation they agreed to 
advise his appointment as commander in chief. 
That same day Kutuzov was appointed com- 
mander in chief with full powers over the 
armies and over the whole region occupied by 
them. 

On the ninth of August Prince Vasfli at An- 
na Pdvlovna's again met the "man of great 
merit." The latter was very attentive to Anna 
Pavlovna because he wanted to be appointed 
director of one of the educational establish- 
ments for young ladies. Prince Vasili entered 
the room with the air of a happy conqueror 
who has attained the object of his desires. 

"Well, have you heard the great news? 
Prince Kutuzov is field marshal! All dissensions 
are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At 
last we have a man!" said he, glancing sternly 
and significantly round at everyone in the draw- 
ing room. 

The "man of great merit," despite his desire 
to obtain thepost of director, could not refrain 
from reminding Prince Vasili of his former 
opinion. Though this was impolite to Prince 
Vasili in Anna Pdvlovna's drawing room, and 
also to Anna Pavlovna herself who had re- 
ceived the news with delight, he could not re- 
sist the temptation, 



"But, Prince, they say he is blindl" said he, 
reminding Prince Vasfli of his own words. 

"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said 
Prince Vasili rapidly, in a deep voice and with 
a slight coughthe voice and cough with which 
he was wont to dispose of all difficulties. 

"He sees well enough," he added. "And 
what I am so pleased about," he went on, "is 
that our sovereign has given him full powers 
over all the armies and the whole region pow- 
ers no commander in chief ever had before. He 
is a second autocrat," he concluded with a vic- 
torious smile. 

"God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna 
Pdvlovna. 

The "man of great merit," who was still a 
novice in court circles, wishing to flatter Anna 
Pdvlovna by defending her former position on 
this question, observed: 

"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to 
give Kutuzov those powers. They say he blushed 
like a girl to whom Joconde * is read, when he 
said to Kutuzov: 'Your Emperor and the Father- 
land award you this honor.' " 

"Perhaps the heart took no part in that 
speech," said Anna Pdvlovna. 

"Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, 
who would not now yield Kutuzov to anyone; 
in his opinion Kutuzovwas not only admirable 
himself, but was adored by everybody. "No, 
that's impossible," said he, "for our sovereign 
appreciated him so highly before." 

"God grant only that Prince Kutuzov as- 
sumes real power and does not allow anyone to 
put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pdv- 
lovna. 

Understanding at once to whom she allud- 
ed, Prince Vasili said in a whisper: 

"I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an 
absolute condition that the Tsar^vich should 
not be with the army. Do you know what he 
said to the Emperor?" 

And Prince Vasili repeated the words sup- 
posed to have been spoken by Kutuzov to the 
Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does 
wrong nor reward him if he does right." 

"Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I 
have known him a long time!" 

"They even say," remarked the "man of 
great merit" who did not yet possess courtly 
tact, "that his excellency made it an express 
condition that the sovereign himself should not 
be with the army." 

As soon as he said this both Prince Vasfli and 

1 Joconde La Fontaine's first contds in verse, 
which are considered improper,~TR. 



BOOK TEN 



405 



Anna Pdvlovna turned away from him and 
glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his 
naivete*. 

CHAPTER VII 

WHILE THIS was taking place in Petersburg the 
French had already passed Smolensk and were 
drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napo- 
leon's historian Thiers, like other of his his- 
torians, trying to justify his hero says that he 
was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his 
will. He is as right as other historians who look 
for the explanation of historic events in the 
will of one man; he is as right as the Russian 
historians who maintain that Napoleon was 
drawn to Moscow by the skill of the Russian 
commanders. Here besides the law of retrospec- 
tion, which regards all the past as a prepara- 
tion for events that subsequently occur, the 
law of reciprocity comes in, confusing the whole 
matter. A good chessplayer having lost a game 
is sincerely convinced that his loss resulted 
from a mistake he made and looks for that mis- 
take in the opening, but forgets that at each 
stage of the game there were similar mistakes 
and that none of his moves were perfect. He 
only notices the mistake to which he pays at- 
tention, because his opponent took advantage 
of it. How much more complex than this is the 
game of war, which occurs under certain limits 
of time, and where it is not one will that ma- 
nipulates lifelessobjects, but everything results 
from innumerable conflicts of various willsl 

After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle be- 
yond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma, and then at 
Tsdrevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that ow- 
ing to a conjunction of innumerable circum- 
stances the Russians could not give battle till 
they reached Borodin6, seventy miles from 
Moscow. From Vyazma Napoleon ordered a 
direct advance on Moscow. 

Moscou, la capitate asiatique de ce grand 
empire, la ville sacreedes peuples d'Alexandre, 
Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en forme 
de pagodes chinoises, 1 this Moscow gave Na- 
poleon's imagination no rest. On the march 
from Vydzma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode 
his light bay bobtailed ambler accompanied by 
his Guards, his bodyguard, his pages, and aides- 
de-camp. Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped 
behind to question a Russian prisoner cap- 
tured by the cavalry. Followed by Lelorgne 

1 "Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great em- 
pire, the sacred city of Alexander's people, Moscow 
with its innumerable churches shaped like Chinese 
pagodas." 



d'Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napo- 
leon at a gallop and reined in his horse with an 
amused expression. 

"Well?" asked Napoleon. 

"One of Platov's Cossacks says that Pldtov's 
corps is joining up with the main army and 
that Kutiizov has been appointed commander 
in chief. He is a very shrewd and garrulous 
fellow." 

Napoleon smiled and told them to give the 
Cossack a horse and bring the man to him. He 
wished to talk to him himself. Several adju- 
tants galloped off, and an hour later, Lavriish- 
ka, the serf Denfsov had handed over to Ros- 
t6v, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly's jack- 
et and on a French cavalry saddle, with a ro- 
guish, merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told 
him to ride by his side and began questioning 
him. 

"You are a Cossack?" 

"Yes, a Cossack, your Honor." 

"The Cossack, not knowing in what com- 
pany he was, for Napoleon's plain appearance 
had nothing about it that would reveal to an 
Oriental mind the presence of a monarch, 
talked with extreme familiarity of the incidents 
of the war," says Thiers, narrating this episode. 
In reality Lavriishka, having got drunk the 
day before and left his master dinnerless, had 
been whipped and sent to the village in quest 
of chickens, where he engaged in looting till 
the French took him prisoner. Lavriishka was 
one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who 
have seen all sorts of things, consider it neces- 
sary to do everything in a mean and cunning 
way, are ready to render any sort of service 
to their master, and are keen at guessing 
their master's baser impulses, especially those 
prompted by vanity and pettiness. 

Finding himself in the company of Napole- 
on, whose identity he had easily and surely rec- 
ognized, Lavriishka was not in the least abashed 
but merely did his utmost to gain his new mas- 
ter's favor. 

He knew very well that this was Napoleon, 
but Napoleon's presence could no more intim- 
idate him than Rost6v's, or a sergeant major's 
with the rods, would have done, for he had 
nothing that either the sergeant major or Na- 
poleon could deprive him of. 

So he rattled on, telling all the gossip he had 
heard among the orderlies. Much of it was true. 
But when Napoleon asked him whether the 
Russians thought they would beat Bonaparte 
or not, Lavriishka screwed up his eyes and con- 
sidered. 



406 



WAR AND PEACE 



In this question he saw subtle cunning, as 
men of his type see cunning in everything, so 
he frowned and did not answer immediately. 

"It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if 
there's a battle soon, yours will win. That's 
right. But if three days pass, then after that, 
well, then that same battle will not soon be 
over." 

Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted 
this speech to Napoleon thus: "If a battle takes 
place within the next three days the French 
will win, but if later, God knows what will 
happen." Napoleon did not smile, though he 
was evidently in high good humor, and he or- 
dered these words to be repeated. 

Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him 
further, pretending not to know who Napo- 
leon was, added: 

"We know that you have Bonaparte and that 
he has beaten everybody in the world, but we 
are a different matter . . ."without knowing 
why or how this bit of boastful patriotism 
slipped out at the end. 

The interpreter translated these words with- 
out the last phrase, and Bonaparte smiled. 
"The young Cossack made his mighty inter- 
locutor smile," says Thiers. After riding a few 
paces in silence, Napoleon turned to Berthier 
and said he wished to see how the news that he 
was talking to the Emperor himself, to that 
very Emperor who had written his immortally 
victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect 
this enfant du Don. 1 

The fact was accordingly conveyed toLavru- 
shka. 

La vrtishka, understanding that this was done 
to perplex him and that Napoleon expected 
him to be frightened, to gratify his new mas- 
ters promptly pretended to be astonished and 
awe-struck, opened his eyes wide, and assumed 
the expression he usually put on when taken 
to be whipped. "As soon as Napoleon's inter- 
preter had spoken," says Thiers, "the Cossack, 
seized by amazement, did not utter another 
word, but rode on, his eyes fixed on the con- 
queror whose fame had reached him across the 
steppes of the East. All his loquacity was sud- 
denly arrested and replaced by a naive and si- 
lent feeling of admiration. Napoleon, after 
making the Cossack a present, had him set free 
like a bird restored to its native fields." 

Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow 
that so appealed to his imagination, and "the 
bird restored to its native fields" galloped to 
our outposts, inventing on the way all that had 

1 "Child of the Don." 



not taken place but that he meant to relate to 
his comrades. What had really taken place he 
did not wish to relate because it seemed to him 
not worth telling. He found the Cossacks, in- 
quired for the regiment operating with Pla- 
tov's detachment, and by evening found his 
master, Nicholas Rost6v, quartered at Yank6- 
vo. Rost6v was just mounting to go for a ride 
round the neighboring villages with Ilyfn; he 
let Lavriishka have another horse and took him 
along with him. 

CHAPTER VIII 

PRINCESS MARY was not in Moscow and out of 
danger as Prince Andrew supposed. 

After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk 
the old prince suddenly seemed to awake as 
from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to 
be called up from the villages and armed, and 
wrote a letter to the commander in chief in- 
forming him that he had resolved to remain at 
Bald Hills to the last extremity and to defend 
it, leaving to the commander in chief's discre- 
tion to take measures or not for the defense of 
Bald Hills, where one of Russia's oldest gen- 
erals would be captured or killed, and he an- 
nounced to his household that he would re- 
main at Bald Hills. 

But while himself remaining, he gave in- 
structions for the departure of the princess and 
Dessalles with the little prince to Boguchdrovo 
and thence to Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed 
by her father's feverish and sleepless activity 
after his previous apathy, could not bring her- 
self to leave him alone and for the first time in 
her life ventured to disobey him. She refused 
to go away arid her father's fury broke over her 
in a terrible storm. He repeated every injustice 
he had ever inflicted on her. Trying to convict 
her, he told her she had worn him out, had 
caused his quarrel with his son, had harbored 
nasty suspicions of him, making it the object 
of her life to poison his existence, and he drove 
her from his study telling her that if she did 
not go away it was all the same to him. He de- 
clared that he did not wish to remember her 
existence and warned her not to dare to let 
him see her. The fact that he did not, as she 
had feared, order her to be carried away by 
force but only told her not to let him see her 
cheered Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof 
that in the depth of his soul he was glad she 
was remaining at home and had not gone away. 

The morning after little Nicholas had left, 
the old prince donned his full uniform and 
prepared to visit the commander in chief. His 



BOOK TEN 



407 



caUche was already at the door. Princess Mary 
saw him walk out of the house in his uniform 
wearing all his orders and go down the garden 
to review his armed peasants and domestic 
serfs. She sat by the window listening to his 
voice which reached her from the garden. Sud- 
denly several men came running up the avenue 
with frightened faces. 

Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down 
the flower-bordered path, and into the avenue. 
A large crowd of militiamen and domestics 
were moving toward her, and in their midst 
several men were supporting by the armpits 
and dragging along a little old man in a uni- 
form and decorations. She ran up to him and, 
in the play of the sunlight that fell in small 
round spots through the shade of the lime-tree 
avenue, could not be sure what change there 
was in his face. All she could see was that his 
former stern and determined expression had 
altered to one of timidity and submission. On 
seeing his daughter he moved his helpless lips 
and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to 
make out what he wanted. He was lifted up, 
carried to his study, and laid on the very couch 
he had so feared of late. 

The doctor, who was fetched that same night, 
bled him and said that the prince had had a 
seizure paralyzing his right side. 

It was becoming more and more dangerous 
to remain at Bald Hills, and next day they 
moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor 
accompanying him. 

By the time they reached Bogucharovo, Des- 
salles and the little prince had already left for 
Moscow. 

For three weeks the old prince lay stricken 
by paralysis in the new house Prince Andrew 
had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the same 
state, getting neither better nor worse. He was 
unconscious and lay like a distorted corpse. He 
muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lips 
twitching, and it was impossible to tell wheth- 
er he understood what was going on around 
him or not. One thing was certain that he 
was suffering and wished to say something. But 
what it was, no one could tell: it might be 
some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man, or it 
might relate to public affairs, or possibly to 
family concerns. 

The doctor said this restlessness did not 
mean anything and was due to physical causes; 
but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell 
her something, and the fact that her presence 
always increased his restlessness confirmed her 
opinion. 



He was evidently suffering both physically 
and mentally. There was no hope of recovery. 
It was impossible for him to travel, it would 
not do to let him die on the road. "Would it 
not be better if the end did come, the very 
end?" Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night 
and day, hardly sleeping at all, she watched 
him and, terrible to say, often watched him not 
with hope of finding signs of improvement but 
wishing to find symptoms of the approach of 
the end. 

Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this 
feeling in herself, yet there it was. And what 
seemed still more terrible to her was that since 
her father's illness began (perhaps even sooner, 
when she stayed with him expectingsomething 
to happen), all the personal desires and hopes 
that had been forgotten or sleeping within her 
had awakened. Thoughts that had not entered 
her mind for yearsthoughts of a life free from 
the fear of her father, and even the possibility 
of love and of family happiness floated con- 
tinually in her imagination like temptations of 
the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, 
questions continually recurred to her as to how 
she would order her life now, after that. These 
were temptations of the devil and Princess 
Mary knew it. She knew that the sole weapon 
against him was prayer, and she tried to pray. 
She assumed an attitude of prayer, looked at 
the icons, repeated the words of a prayer, but 
she could not pray. She felt that a different 
world had now taken possession of her the 
life of a world of strenuous and free activity, 
quite opposed to the spiritual world in which 
till now she had been confined and in which 
her greatest comfort had been prayer. She could 
not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares 
took possession of her. 

It was becoming dangerous to remain in 
Bogucharovo. News of the approach of the 
French came from all sides, and in one village, 
ten miles from Boguchdrovo, a homestead had 
been looted by French marauders. 

The doctor insisted on the necessity of mov- 
ing the prince; the provincial Marshal of the 
Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary to 
persuade her to get away as quickly as possible, 
and the head of the rural police having come 
to Bogucharovo urged the same thing, saying 
that the French were only some twenty-five 
miles away, that French proclamations were 
circulating in the villages, and that if the prin- 
cess did not take her father away before the 
fifteenth, he could not answer for the conse- 
quences. 



WAR AND PEACE 



The princess decided to leave on the fif- 
teenth. The cares of preparation and giving 
orders, for which everyone came to her, occu- 
pied her all day. She spent the night of the 
fourteenth as usual, without undressing, in the 
room next to the one where the prince lay. 
Several times, waking up, she heard his groans 
and muttering, the creak of his bed, and the 
steps of Tikhon and the doctor when they 
turned him over. Several times she listened at 
the door, and it seemed to her that his mutter- 
ings were louder than usual and that they 
turned him over oftener. She could not sleep 
and several times went to the door and listened, 
wishing to enter but not deciding to do so. 
Though he did riot speak, Princess Mary saw 
and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety 
on his account was to him. She had noticed 
with what dissatisfaction he turned from the 
look she sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. 
She knew that her going in during the night 
at an unusual hour would irritate him. 

But never had she felt so grieved for him or 
so much afraid of losing him. She recalled all 
her life with him and in every word and act of 
his found an expression of his love of her. Occa- 
sionally amid these memories temptations of 
the devil would surge into her imagination: 
thoughts of how things would be after his 
death, and how her new, liberated life would 
be ordered. But she drove these thoughts away 
with disgust. Toward morning he became quiet 
and she fell asleep. 

She woke late. That sincerity which often 
comes with waking showed her clearly what 
chiefly concerned her about her father's illness. 
On waking she listened to what was going on 
behind the door and, hearing him groan, said 
to herself with a sigh that things were still the 
same. 

"But what could have happened? What did 
I want? I want his death!" she cried with a 
feeling of loathing for herself. 

She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and 
went out to the porch. In front of it stood car- 
nages without horses and things were being 
packed into the vehicles. 

It was a warm, gray morning. Princess Mary 
stopped at the porch, still horrified by her 
spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her 
thoughts before going to her father. The doc- 
tor came downstairs and went out to her. 

"He is a little better today," said he. "I was 
looking for you. One can make out something 
of what he is saying. His head is clearer. Come 
in, he is asking for you. . . ." 



Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at 
this news that she grew pale and leaned against 
the wall to keep from falling. To see him, talk 
to him, feel his eyes on her now that her whole 
soul was overflowing with those dreadful, 
wicked temptations, was a torment of joy and 
terror. 

"Come," said the doctor. 

Princess Mary entered her father's room and 
went up to his bed. He was lying on his back 
propped up high, and his small bony hands 
with their knotted purple veins were lying on 
the quilt; his left eye gazed straight before him, 
his right eye was awry, and his brows and lips 
motionless. He seemed altogether so thin, 
small, and pathetic. His face seemed to have 
shriveled or melted; his features had grown 
smaller. Princess Mary went up and kissed his 
hand. His left hand pressed hers so that she 
understood that he had long been waiting for 
her to come. He twitched her hand, and his 
brows and lips quivered angrily. 

She looked at him in dismay trying to guess 
what he wanted of her. When she changed her 
position so that his left eye could see her face 
he calmed down, not taking his eyes off her for 
some seconds. Then his lips and tongue moved, 
sounds came, and he begati to speak, gazing 
timidly and imploringly at her, evidently 
afraid that she might not understand. 

Straining all her faculties Princess Mary 
looked at him. The comic efforts with which 
he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes 
and with difficulty repress the sobs that rose 
to her throat. He said something, repeating the 
same words several times. She could not under- 
stand them, but tried to guess what he was say- 
ing and inquiringly repeated the words he ut- 
tered. 

"Mmm ... ar ... ate ... ate . . ." he repeated 
several times. 

It was quite impossible to understand these 
sounds. The doctor thought he had guessed 
them, and inquiringly repeated: "Mary, are 
you afraid?" The prince shook his head, and 
again repeated the same sounds. 

"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned 
Princess Mary. 

He made a mumbling sound in confirma- 
tion of this, took her hand, and began pressing 
it to different parts of his breast as if trying to 
find the right place for it. 

"Always thoughts . . . about you . . . thoughts 
. . ." he then uttered much more clearly than 
he had done before, now that he was sure of 
being understood. 



BOOK TfcN 



Princess Mary pressed her head against his 
hand, trying to hide her sobs and tears. 

He moved his hand over her hair. 

"I have been calling you all night . . ." he 
brought out. 

"If only I had known . . ." she said through 
her tears. "I was afraid to come in." 

He pressed her hand. 

"Weren't you asleep?" 

"No, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, 
shaking her head. 

Unconsciously imitating her father, she now 
tried to express herself as he did, as much as 
possible by signs, and her tongue too seemed 
to move with difficulty. 

"Dear one . . . Dearest . . ." Princess Mary 
could not quite make out what he said, but 
from his look it was clear that he had uttered a 
tender caressing word such as he had never 
used to her before. "Why didn't you come in?" 

"And I, I was wishing for his death!" thought 
Princess Mary. 

He was silent awhile. 

"Thank you . . . daughter dearl . . . for all, 
for all ... forgive! . . . thank you! . . . forgive! 
. . . thank you! ..." and tears began to flow from 
his eyes. "Call Andrew!" he said suddenly, and 
a childish, timid expression of doubt showed 
itself on his face as he spoke. 

He himself seemed aware that his demand 
was meaningless. So at least it seemed to Prin- 
cess Mary. 

"I have a letter from him," she replied. 

He glanced at her with timid surprise. 

"Where is he?" 

"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk." 

He closed his eyes and remained silent a 
long time. Then as if in answer to his doubts 
and to confirm the fact that now he under- 
stood and remembered everything, he nodded 
his head and reopened his eyes. 

"Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia 
has perished. They've destroyed her." 

And he began to sob, and again tears flowed 
from his eyes. Princess Mary could no longer 
restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his 
face. 

Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he 
pointed to his eyes, and Tfkhon, understand- 
ing him, wiped away the tears. 

Then he again opened his eyes and said 
something none of them could understand for 
a long time, till at last Tikhon understood and 
repeated it. Princess Mary had sought the mean- 
ing of his words in the mood in which he had 
just been speaking. She thought he was speak- 



ing of Russia, or Prince Andrew, of herself, of 
his grandson, or of his own death, and so she 
could not guess his words. 

"Put on your white dress. I like it," was what 
he said. 

Having understood this Princess Mary 
sobbed still louder, and the doctor taking her 
arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her 
and trying to persuade her to prepare for her 
journey. When she had left the room the prince 
again began speaking about his son, about the 
war, and about the Emperor, angrily twitching 
his brows and raising his hoarse voice, and 
then he had a second and final stroke. 

Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The 
day had cleared, it was hot and sunny. She 
could understand nothing, think of nothing 
and feel nothing, except passionate love for 
her father, love such as she thought she had 
never felt till that moment. She ran out sob- 
bing into the garden and as far as the pond, 
along the avenues of young lime trees Prince 
Andrew had planted. 

"Yes ...I...I...I wished for his death! 
Yes, I wanted it to end quicker. ... I wished to 
be at peace. . . . And what will become of me? 
What use will peace be when he is no longer 
here?" Princess Mary murmured, pacing the 
garden with hurried steps and pressing her 
hands to her bosom which heaved with con- 
vulsive sobs. 

When she had completed the tour of the 
garden, which brought her again to the house, 
she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne who had re- 
mained at Bogucharovo and did not wish to 
leave itcoming toward her with a stranger. 
This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the 
district, who had come personally to point out 
to the princess the necessity for her prompt de- 
parture. Princess Mary listened without under- 
standing him; she led him to the house, offered 
him lunch, and sat down with him. Then, 
excusing herself, she went to the door of 
the old prince's room. The doctor came out 
with an agitated face and said she could not 
enter. 

"Go away, Princess! Go away ... go away!" 

She returned to the garden and sat down on 
the grass at the foot of the slope by the pond, 
where no one could see her. She did not know 
how long she had been there when she was 
aroused by the sound of a woman's footsteps 
running along the path. She rose and saw Dun- 
yasha her maid, who was evidently looking for 
her, and who stopped suddenly as if in alarm 
on seeing her mistress. 



4io 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Please come, Princess . . . The Prince . . ." 
said Dunydsha in a breaking voice. 

"Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming 1" re- 
plied the princess hurriedly, not giving Dun- 
ydsha time to finish what she was saying, and 
trying to avoid seeing the girl she ran toward 
the house. 

"Princess, it's God's willl You must be pre- 
pared for everything," said the Marshal, meet- 
ing her at the house door. 

"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried an- 
grily to him. 

The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed 
him aside and ran to her father's door. "Why 
are these people with frightened faces stop- 
ping me? I don't want any of theml And what 
are they doing here?" she thought. She opened 
the door and the bright daylight in that previ- 
ously darkened room startled her. In the room 
were her nurse and other women. They all 
drew back from the bed, making way for her. 
He was still lying on the bed as before, but the 
stern expression of his quiet face made Prin- 
cess Mary stop short on the threshold. 

"No, he's not dead it's impossiblel" she told 
herself and approached him, and repressing the 
terror that seized her, she pressed her lips to his 
cheek. But she stepped back immediately. All 
the force of the tenderness she had been feel- 
ing for him vanished instantly and was re- 
placed by a feeling of horror at what lay there 
before her. "No, he is no morel He is not, but 
here where he was is something unfamiliarand 
hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent 
mystery I" And hiding her face in her hands, 
Princess Mary sank into the arms of the doctor, 
who held her up. 



In the presence 
the women washed 



nd the doctor, 
at had been the 



p 

tied his head up with a nanclkercITTeTTffaTThe 
mouth should not stiffen while open, and with 
another handkerchief tied together the legs 
that were already spreading apart. Then they 
dressed him in uniform with his decorations 
and placed his shriveled little body on a table. 
Heaven only knows who arranged all this and 
when, but it all got done as if of its own ac- 
cord. Toward night candles were burning 
round his coffin, a pall was spread over it, the 
floor was strewn with sprays of juniper, a 
printed band was tucked in under his shriveled 
head, and in a corner of the room sat a chanter 
reading the psalms. 

Just as horses shy and snort and gather about 
a dead horse, so the inmates of the house and 



strangers crowded into the drawing room round 
the coffin the Marshal, the village Elder, peas- 
ant womenand all with fixed and frightened 
eyes, crossing themselves, bowed and kissed the 
old prince's cold and stiffened hand. 

CHAPTER IX 

UNTIL PRINCE ANDREW settled in Boguchdrovo 
its owners had always been absentees, and its 
peasants were of quite a different character 
from those of Bald Hills. They differed from 
them in speech, dress, and disposition. They 
were called steppe peasants. The old prince 
used to approve of them for their endurance at 
work when they came to Bald Hills to help with 
the harvest or to dig ponds and ditches, but he 
disliked them for their boorishness. 

Prince Andrew's last stay at Boguchdrovo, 
when he introduced hospitals and schools and 
reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, 
had not softened their disposition but had on 
the contrary strengthened in them the traits of 
character the old prince called boorishness. 
Various obscure rumors were always current 
among them: at one time a rumor that they 
would all be enrolled as Cossacks; at another 
of a new religion to which they were all to be 
converted; then of some proclamation of the 
Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1 797 
(in connection with which it was rumored that 
freedom had been granted them but the land- 
owners had stopped it), then of Peter Fedoro- 
vich's 1 return to the throne in seven years' 
time, when everything would be made free and 
so "simple" that there would be no restrictions. 
Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and his in- 
vasion were connected in their minds with the 
same sort of vague notions of Antichrist, the 
end of the world, and "pure freedom." 

In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large 
villages belonging to the crown or to owners 
whose serfs paid quitrent and could work 
where they pleased. There were very few resi- 
dent landlords in the neighborhood and also 
very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the 
lives of the peasantry of those parts the myste- 
rious undercurrents in the life of the Russian 
people, the causes and meaning of which are 
so baffling to contemporaries, were more clear- 
ly and strongly noticeable than among others. 
One instance, which had occurred some twenty 
years before, was a movement among the peas- 
ants to emigrate to some unknown "warm riv- 

1 Peter III, who was assassinated, or died, on the 
accession of his wife, Catherine II, to the throne in 



BOOK 

ers." Hundreds of peasants, among them the 
Boguchdrovo folk, suddenly began selling their 
cattle and moving in whole families toward 
the southeast. As birds migrate to somewhere 
beyond the sea, so these men with their wives 
and children streamed to the southeast, to parts 
where none of them had ever been. They set 
off in caravans, bought their freedom one by 
one or ran away, and drove or walked toward 
the "warm rivers." Many of them were pun- 
ished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold 
and hunger on the road, many returned of 
their own accord, and the movement died down 
of itself just as it had sprung up, without ap- 
parent reason. But such undercurrents still 
existed among the people and gathered new 
forces ready to manifest themselves just as 
strangely, unexpectedly, and at the same time 
simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, 
to anyone living in close touch with these peo- 
ple it was apparent that these undercurrents 
were acting strongly and nearing an eruption. 

Alpdtych, who had reached Boguchdrovo 
shortly before the old prince's death, noticed 
an agitation among the peasants, and that con- 
trary to what was happening in the Bald Hills 
district, where over a radius of forty miles all 
the peasants were moving away and leaving 
their villages to be devastated by the Cossacks, 
the peasants in the steppe region round Bogu- 
chdrovo were, it was rumored, in touch with 
the French, received leaflets from them that 
passed from hand to hand, and did not migrate. 
He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him 
that the peasant Karp, who possessed great 
influence in the village commune and had re- 
cently been away driving a government trans- 
port, had returned with news that the Cossacks 
were destroying deserted villages, but that the 
French did not harm them. Alpdtych also knew 
that on the previous day another peasant had 
even brought from the village of Visloukhovo, 
which was occupied by the French, a procla- 
mation by a French general that no harm 
would be done to the inhabitants, and if they 
remained they would be paid for anything tak- 
en from them. As proof of this the peasant 
had brought from Visloukhovo a hundred ru- 
bles in notes (he did not know that they were 
false) paid to him in advance for hay. 

More important still, Alpdtych learned that 
on the morning of the very day he gave the vil- 
lage Elder orders to collect carts to move the 
princess* luggage from Boguchdrovo, there had 
been a village meeting at which it had been de- 
cided not to move but to wait. Yet there was 



TEN 411 

no time to waste. On the fifteenth, the day of 
the old prince's death, the Marshal had insisted 
on Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it was 
becoming dangerous. He had told her that aft- 
er the sixteenth he could not be responsible 
for what might happen. On the evening of the 
day the old prince died the Marshal went away, 
promising to return next day for the funeral. 
But this he was unable to do, for he received 
tidings that the French had unexpectedly ad- 
vanced, and had barely time to remove his own 
family and valuables from his estate. 

For some thirty years Boguchdrovo had been 
managed by the village Elder, Dron, whom the 
old prince called by the diminutive "Dr6nush- 
ka." 

Dron was one of those physically and men tal- 
ly vigorous peasants who grow big beards as 
soon as they are of age and go on unchanged 
till they are sixty or seventy, without a gray 
hair or the loss of a tooth, as straight and strong 
at sixty as at thirty. 

Soon after the migration to the "warm riv- 
ers," in which he had taken part like the rest, 
Dron was made village Elder and overseer of 
Boguchdrovo, and had since filled that post ir- 
reproachably for twenty-three years. The peas- 
ants feared him more than they did their mas- 
ter. The masters, both the old prince and the 
young, and the steward respected him and 
jestingly called him "the Minister." During 
the whole time of his service Dron had never 
been drunk or ill, never after sleepless nights 
or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fa- 
tigue, and though he could not read he had 
never forgotten a single money account or the 
number of quarters of flour in any of the end- 
less cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a sin- 
gle shock of the whole corn crop on any single 
acre of the Boguchdrovo fields. 

Alpdtych, arriving from the devastated Bald 
Hills estate, sent for his Dron on the day of 
the prince's funeral and told him to have 
twelve horses got ready for the princess* car- 
riages and eighteen carts for the things to be 
removed from Boguchdrovo. Though the peas- 
ants paid quitrent, Alpdtych thought no dif- 
ficulty would be made about complying with 
this order, for there were two hundred and 
thirty households at work in Boguchdrovo and 
the peasants were well to do. But on hearing 
the order Dron lowered his eyes and remained 
silent. Alpdtych named certain peasants he 
knew, from whom he told him to take the carts. 

Dron replied that the horses of these peas- 
ants were away carting. Alpdtych named oth- 



412 WAR AND PEACE 

crs, but they too, according to Dron, had no 
horses available: some horses were carting for 
the government, others were too weak, and 
others had died for want of fodder. It seemed 
that no horses could be had even for the car- 
riages, much less for the carting. 

Alpdtych looked intently at Dron and 
frowned. Just as Dron was a model village Eld- 
er, so Alpdtych had not managed the prince's 
estates for twenty years in vain. He was a model 
steward, possessing in the highest degree the 
faculty of divining the needs and instincts of 
those he dealt with. Having glanced at Dron 
he at once understood that his answers did not 
express his personal views but the general 
mood of the Boguchdrovo commune, by which 
the Elder had already been carried away. But 
he also knew that Dron, who had acquired 
property and was hated by the commune, must 
be hesitating between the two camps: the mas- 
ters' and the serfs'. He noticed this hesitation 
in Dron's look and therefore frowned and 
moved closer up to him. 

"Now just listen, Dr6nushka," said he. 
"Don't talk nonsense to me. His excellency 
Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move 
all the people away and not leave them with 
the enemy, and there is an order from the Tsar 
about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to 
the Tsar. Do you hear?" 

"I hear," Dron answered without lifting his 
eyes. 

Alpdtych was not satisfied with this reply. 

"Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly 1" he said, 
shaking his head. 

"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined 
sadly. 

"Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpdtych repeated, 
withdrawing his hand from his bosom and sol- 
emnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet. "I 
can see through you and three yards into the 
ground under you," he continued, gazing at 
the floor in front of Dron. 

Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at 
Alpdtych and again lowered his eyes. 

"You drop this nonsense and tell the people 
to get ready to leave their homes and go to 
Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow 
morning for the princess* things. And don't go 
to any meeting yourself, do you hear?" 

Dron suddenly fell on his knees. 

"Ydkov Alpdtych, discharge me! Take the 
keys from me and discharge me, for Christ's 
sake!" 

"Stop that!" cried Alpdtych sternly. "I see 
through you and three yards under you," he 



repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping, 
his knowledge of the right time to sow the oats, 
and the fact that he had been able to retain 
the old prince's favor for twenty years had long 
since gained him the reputation of being a 
wizard, and that the power of seeing three 
yards under a man is considered an attribute 
of wizards. 

Dron got up and was about to say something, 
but Alpdtych interrupted him. 

"What is it you have got into your heads, 
eh? . . . What are you thinking of, eh?" 

"What am I to do with the people?" said 
Dron. "They're quite beside themselves; I have 
already told them . . ." 

" 'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpdtych. 
"Are they drinking?" he asked abruptly. 

"Quite beside themselves, Ydkov Alpdtych; 
they've fetched another barrel." 

"Well, then, listen! I'll go to the police of- 
ficer, and you tell them so, and that they must 
stop this and the carts must be got ready." 

"I understand." 

Alpdtych did not insist further. He had man- 
aged people for a long time and knew that the 
chief way to make them obey is to show no sus- 
picion that they can possibly disobey. Having 
wrung a submissive "I understand" from Dron, 
Alpatych contented himself with that, though 
he not only doubted but felt almost certain 
that without the help of troops the carts would 
not be forthcoming. 

And so it was, for when evening came no 
carts had been provided. In the village, out- 
side the drink shop, another meeting was be- 
ing held, which decided that the horses should 
be driven out into the woods and the carts 
should not be provided. Without saying any- 
thing of this to the princess, Alpdtych had his 
own belongings taken out of the carts which 
had arrived from Bald Hills and had those 
horses got ready for the princess' carriages. 
Meanwhile he went himself to the police au- 
thorities. 

CHAPTER X 

AFTER HER FATHER'S FUNERAL Princess Mary 
shut herself up in her room and did not admit 
anyone. A maid came to the door to say that 
Alpdtych was asking for orders about their de- 
parture. (This was before his talk with Dron.) 
Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on 
which she had been lying and replied through 
the closed door that she did not mean to go 
away and begged to be left in peace. 
The windows of the room in which she was 


