BOOK TEN 



4*3 



lying looked westward. She lay on the sofa with 
her face to the wall, fingering the buttons of 
the leather cushion and seeing nothing but 
that cushion, and her confused thoughts were 
centered on one subject the irrevocability of 
death and her own spiritual baseness, which 
she had not suspected, but which had shown 
itself during her father's illness. She wished to 
pray but did not dare to, dared not in her 
present state of mind address herself to God. 
She lay for a long time in that position. 

The sun had reached the other side of the 
house, and its slanting rays shone into theopen 
window, lighting up the room and part of the 
morocco cushion at which Princess Mary was 
looking. The flow of her thoughts suddenly 
stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed 
her hair, got up, and went to the window, in- 
voluntarily inhaling the freshness of the clear 
but windy evening. 

"Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! 
He is gone and no one will hinder you," she 
said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let 
her head fall on the window sill. 

Someone spoke her name in a soft and ten- 
der voice from the garden and kissed her head. 
She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bouri- 
enne in a black dress and weepers. She softly 
approached Princess Mary, sighed, kissed her, 
and immediately began to cry. The princess 
looked up at her. All their former disharmony 
and her own jealousy recurred to her mind. 
But she remembered too how he had changed 
of late toward Mademoiselle Bourienne and 
could not bear to see her, thereby showing how 
unjust were the reproaches Princess Mary had 
mentally addressed to her. "Besides, is it for 
me, for me who desired his death, to condemn 
anyone?" she thought. 

Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the 
position of Mademoiselle Bourienne, whom 
she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet 
was dependent on her and living in her house. 
She felt sorry for her and held out her hand 
with a glance of gentle inquiry. Mademoiselle 
Bourienne at once began crying again and 
kissed that hand, speaking of the princess' sor- 
row and making herself a partner in it. She 
said her only consolation was the fact that the 
princess allowed her to share her sorrow, that 
all the old misunderstandings should sink into 
nothing but this great grief; that she felt her- 
self blameless in regard to everyone, and that 
he, from above, saw her affection and grati- 
tude. The princess heard her, not heeding her 
words but occasionally looking up at her and 



listening to the sound of her voice. 

"Your position is doubly terrible, dear prin- 
cess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne after a 
pause. "I understand that you could not, and 
cannot, think of yourself, but with my love for 
you I must do so. ... Has Alpdtych been to 
you? Has he spoken to you of going away?" she 
asked. 

Princess Mary did not answer. She did not 
understand who was to go or where to. "Is it 
possible to plan or think of anything now? Is 
it not all the same?" she thought, and did not 
reply. 

"You know, chere Marie/' said Mademoi- 
selle Bourienne, "that we are in danger are 
surrounded by the French. It would be danger- 
ous to move now. If we go we are almost sure 
to be taken prisoners, and God knows . . ." 

Princess Mary looked at her companion with- 
out understanding what she was talking about. 

"Oh, if anyone knew how little anything 
matters to me now," she said. "Of course I 
would on no account wish to go away from 
him. . . . Alpdtych did say something about go- 
ing. . . . Speak to him; I can do nothing, noth- 
ing, and don't want to. . . ." 

"I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be 
in time to get away tomorrow, but I think it 
would now be better to stay here," said Made- 
moiselle Bourienne. "Because, you will agree, 
chere Marie, to fall into the hands of the sol- 
diers or of riotous peasants would be terrible." 

Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her 
reticule a proclamation (not printed on ordi- 
nary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, tell- 
ing people not to leave their homes and that 
the French authorities would afford them prop- 
er protection. She handed this to the princess. 

"I think it would be best to appeal to that 
general," she continued, "and I am sure that 
all due respect would be shown you." 

Princess Mary read the paper, and her face 
began to quiver with stifled sobs. 

"From whom did you get this?" she asked. 

"They probably recognized that I am French, 
by my name," replied Mademoiselle Bouri- 
enne blushing. 

Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, 
rose from the window and with a pale face 
went out of the room and into what had been 
Prince Andrew's study. 

"Dunydsha,send Alpatych,or Dr6nushka, or 
somebody to me!" she said, "and tell Mademoi- 
selle Bourienne not to come to me," she added, 
hearing Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We 
must go at once, at once!" she said, appalled at 



414 



WAR AND PEACE 



the thought of being left in the hands of the 
French. 

"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the 
power of the French! That I, the daughter of 
Prince Nicholas Bolk6nski, asked General Ra- 
meau for protection and accepted his favorl" 
This idea horrified her, made her shudder, 
blush, and feel sudi a rush of anger and pride 
as she had never experienced before. All that 
was distressing, and especially all that was hu- 
miliating, in her position rose vividly to her 
mind. "They, the French, would settle in this 
house: M. le General Rameau would occupy 
Prince Andrew's study and amuse himself by 
looking through and reading his letters and 
papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne would do 
the honors of Boguchdrovo for him. I should 
be given a small room as a favor, the soldiers 
would violate my father's newly dug grave to 
steal his crosses and stars, they would tell me 
of their victories over the Russians, and would 
pretend to sympathize with my sorrow . . ." 
thought Princess Mary, not thinking her own 
thoughts but feeling bound to think like her 
father and her brother. For herself she did not 
care where she remained or what happened to 
her, but she felt herself the representative of 
her dead father and of Prince Andrew. Invol- 
untarily she thought their thoughts and felt 
their feelings. What they would have said and 
what they would have done she felt bound to 
say and do. She went into Prince Andrew's 
study, trying to enter completely into his ideas, 
and considered her position. 

The demands of life, which had seemed to 
her annihilated by her father's death, all at 
once rose before her with a new, previously un- 
known force and took possession of her. 

Agitated and flushed she paced the room, 
sending now for Michael Ivanovich and now 
for Tikhon or Dron. Dunydsha, the nurse, and 
the other maids could not say in how far Made- 
moiselle Bourienne's statement was correct. 
Alpdtych was riot at home, he had gone to the 
police. Neither could the architect Michael 
Ivanovich, who on being sent for came in with 
sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything. With 
just the same smile of agreement with which 
for fifteen years he had been accustomed to 
answer the old prince without expressing views 
of his own, he now replied to Princess Mary, so 
that nothing definite could be got from his 
answers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken, 
emaciated face that bore the stamp of incon- 
solable grief, replied: "Yes, Princess" to all 
Princess Mary's questions and hardly refrained 



from sobbing as he looked at her. 

At length Dron, the village Elder, entered 
the room and with a deep bow to Princess 
Mary came to a halt by the doorpost. 

Princess Mary walked up and down the 
room and stopped in front of him. 

"Dr6nushka," she said, regarding as a sure 
friend this Dr6nushka who always used to 
bring a special kind of gingerbread from his 
visit to the fair at Vyazma every year and smil- 
ingly offer it to her, "Dr6nushka, now since 
our misfortune . . ." she began, but could not 
go on. 

"We are all in God's hands," said he, with a 
sigh. 

They were silent for a while. 

"Dronushka, Alpdtych has gone off some- 
where and I have no one to turn to. Is it true, 
as they tell me, that I can't even go away?" 

"Why shouldn't you go away, your excel- 
lency? You can go," said Dron. 

"I was told it would be dangerous because 
of the enemy. Dear friend, I can do nothing. I 
understand nothing. I have nobody I I want to 
go away tonight or early tomorrow morning." 

Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess 
Mary and said: "There are no horses; I told 
Ydkov Alpdtych so." 

"Why are there none?" asked the princess. 

"It's all God's scourge," said Dron. "What 
horses we had have been taken for the army or 
have died this is such a year! It's not a case of 
feeding horses we may die of hunger ourselves 1 
As it is, some go three days without eating. 
We've nothing, we've been ruined." 

Princess Mary listened attentively to what 
he told her. 

"The peasants are ruined? They have no 
bread?" she asked. 

"They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's 
not a case of carting." 

"But why didn't you tell me, Dr6nushka? 
Isn't it possible to help them? I'll do all I 
can. . . ." 

To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at 
a moment when such sorrow was filling her 
soul, there could be rich people and poor, and 
the rich could refrain from helping the poor. 
She had heard vaguely that there was such a 
thing as "landlord's corn" which was some- 
times given to the peasants. She also knew that 
neither her father nor her brother would re- 
fuse to help the peasants in need, she only 
feared to make some mistake in speaking 
about the distribution of the grain she wished 
to give. She was glad such cares presented them- 



BOOK TEN 



415 



selves, enabling her without scruple to forget 
her own grief. She began asking Dron about 
the peasants' needs and what there was in 
Boguchdrovo that belonged to the landlord. 

"But we have grain belonging to my broth- 
er?" she said. 

"The landlord's grain is all safe," replied 
Dron proudly. "Our prince did not order it to 
be sold." 

"Give it to the peasants, let them have all 
they need; I give you leave in my brother's 
name," said she. 

Dron made no answer but sighed deeply. 

"Give them that corn if there is enough of 
it. Distribute it all. I give this order in my 
brother's name; and tell them that what is ours 
is theirs. We do not grudge them anything. 
Tell them so." 

Dron looked intently at the princess while 
she was speaking. 

"Discharge me, little mother, for God's sakel 
Order the keys to be taken from me," said he. 
"I have served twenty-three years and have 
done no wrong. Discharge me, for God's sake!" 

Princess Mary did not understand what he 
wanted of her or why he was asking to be dis- 
charged. She replied that she had never doubt- 
ed his devotion and that she was ready to do 
anything for him and for the peasants. 

CHAPTER XI 

AN HOUR LATER Dunydsha came to tell the prin- 
cess that Dron had come, and all the peasants 
had assembled at the barn by the princess' or- 
der and wished to have word with their mis- 
tress. 

"But I never told them to come," said Prin- 
cess Mary. "I only told Dron to let them have 
the grain." 

"Only, for God's sake, Princess dear, have 
them sent away and don't go out to them. It's 
all a trick," said Dunydsha, "and when Yakov 
Alpdtych returns let us get away . . . and please 
don't . . ." 

"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in 
surprise. 

"I know it is, only listen to me for God's 
sake! Ask nurse too. They say they don't agree 
to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered." 

"You're making some mistake. I never or- 
dered them to go away," said Princess Mary. 
"Call Drdnushka." 

Dron came and confirmed Dunydsha's words; 
the peasants had come by the princess' order. 

"But I never sent for them," declared the 
princess. "You must have given my message 



wrong. I only said that you were to give them 
the grain." 

Dron only sighed in reply. 

"If you order it they will go away," said he. 

"No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess 
Mary, and in spite of the nurse's and Dunyd- 
sha's protests she went out into the porch; 
Dron, Dunydsha, the nurse, and Michael Ivdn- 
ovich following her. 

"They probably think I am offering them 
the grain to bribe them to remain here, while 
I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of 
the French," thought Princess Mary. "I will 
offer them monthly rations and housing at our 
Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do 
even more in rny place," she thought as she 
went out in the twilight toward the crowd 
standing on the pasture by the barn. 

The men crowded closer together, stirred, 
and rapidly took off their hats. Princess Mary 
lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, 
came close up to them. So many different eyes, 
old and young, were fixed on her, and there 
were so many different faces, that she could 
not distinguish any of them and, feeling that 
she must speak to them all at once, did not 
know how to do it. But again the sense that she 
represented her father and her brother gave 
her courage, and she boldly began her speech. 

"I am very glad you have come," she said 
without raising her eyes, and feeling her heart 
beating quickly and violently. "Dronushka 
tells me that the war has ruined you. That is 
our common misfortune, and I shall grudge 
nothing to help you. I am myself going away 
because it is dangerous here . . . the enemy is 
near . . . because ... I am giving you every- 
thing, my friends, and I beg you to take every- 
thing, all our grain, so that you may not suffer 
want! And if you have been told that I am giv- 
ing you the grain to keep you here that is not 
true. On the contrary, I ask you to go with all 
your belongings to our estate near Moscow, 
and I promise you I will see to it that there you 
shall want for nothing. You shall be given 
food and lodging." 

The princess stopped. Sighs were the only 
sound heard in the crowd. 

"I am not doing this on my own account," 
she continued, "I do it in the name of my dead 
father, who was a good master to you, and of 
my brother and his son." 

Again she paused. No one broke the silence. 

"Ours is a common misfortune and we will 
share it together. All that is mine is yours," she 
concluded, scanning the faces before her. 



416 



All eyes were gazing at her with one and the 
same expression. She could not fathom wheth- 
er it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or ap- 
prehension and distrust but the expression 
on all the faces was identical. 

"We are all very thankful for your bounty, 
but it won't do for us to take the landlord's 
grain," said a voice at the back of the crowd. 

"But why not?" asked the princess. 

No one replied and Princess, Mary, looking 
round at the crowd, found that every eye she 
met now was immediately dropped. 

"But why don't you want to take it?" she 
asked again. 

No one answered. 

The silence began to oppress the princess 
and she tried to catch someone's eye. 

"Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a 
very old man who stood just in front of her 
leaning on his stick. "If you think something 
more is wanted, tell mel I will do anything," 
said she, catching his eye. 

But as if this angered him, he bent his head 
quite low and muttered: 

"Why should we agree? We don't want the 
grain." 

"Why should we give up everything? We 
don't agree. Don't agree. . . . We are sorry for 
you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself, 
alone . . ." came from various sides of the crowd. 

And again all the faces in that crowd bore 
an identical expression, though now it was 
certainly not an expression of curiosity or grati- 
tude, but of angry resolve. 

"But you can't have understood me," said 
Princess Mary with a sad smile. "Why don't 
you want to go? I promise to house and feed 
you, while here the enemy would ruin you " 

But her voice was drowned by the voices of 
the crowd. 

"We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We 
won't take your grain. We don't agree." 

Again Princess Mary tried to catch some- 
one's eye, but not a single eye in the crowd was 
turned to her; evidently they were all trying to 
avoid her look. She felt strange and awkward. 

"Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into 
slavery! Pull down your houses and go into 
bondage! I dare say! Til give you grain, in- 
deed!' she says," voices in the crowd were heard 
saying. 

With drooping head Princess Mary left the 
crowd and went back to the house. Having re- 
peated her order to Dron to have horses ready 
for her departure next morning, she went to 



WAR AND PEACE 

her room and remained alone with her own 
thoughts. 



CHAPTER XII 

FOR A LONG TIME that night Princess Mary sat 
by the open window of her room hearing the 
sound of the peasants' voices that reached her 
from the village, but it was not of them she was 
thinking. She felt that she could not under- 
stand them however much she might think 
about them. She thought only of one thing, 
her sorrow, which, after the break caused by 
cares for the present, seemed already to be- 
long to the past. Now she could remember it 
and weep or pray. 

After sunset the wind had dropped. The 
night was calm and fresh. Toward midnight 
the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the 
full moon began to show from behind the lime 
trees, a fresh white dewy mist began to rise, 
and stillness reigned over the village and the 
house. 

Pictures of the near past her father's illness 
and last moments rose one after another to 
her memory. With mournful pleasure she now 
lingered over these images, repelling with hor- 
ror only the last one, the picture of his death, 
which she felt she could not contemplate even 
in imagination at this still and mystic hour of 
night. And these pictures presented themselves 
to her so clearly and in such detail that they 
seemed now present, now past, and now fu- 
ture. 

She vividly recalled the moment when he 
had his first stroke and was being dragged 
along by his armpits through the garden at 
Bald Hills, muttering something with his help- 
less tongue, twitching his gray eyebrows and 
looking uneasily and timidly at her. 

"Even then he wanted to tell me what he 
told me the day he died," she thought. "He had 
always thought what he said then." And she re- 
called in all its detail the night at Bald Hills 
before he had the last stroke, when with a fore- 
boding of disaster she had remained at home 
against his will. She had not slept and had 
stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and going to the 
door of the conservatory where he slept that 
night had listened at the door. In a suffering 
and weary voice he was saying something to 
Tikhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warm 
nights and of the Empress. Evidently he had 
wanted to talk. "And why didn't he call me? 
Why didn't he let me be there instead of Tfk- 
lion?" Princess Mary had thought and thought 



BOOK TEN 



47 



again now. "Now he will never tell anyone 
what he had in his soul. Never will that mo- 
ment return for him or for me when he might 
have said all he longed to say, and not Tikhon 
but I might have heard and understood him. 
Why didn't I enter the room?" she thought. 
"Perhaps he would then have said to me what 
he said the day he died. While talking to Tik- 
hon he asked about me twice. He wanted to see 
me, and I was standing close by, outside the 
door. It was sad and painful for him to talk to 
Tikhon who did not understand him. I re- 
member how he began speaking to him about 
Lise as if she were alive he had forgotten she 
was dead and Tikhon reminded him that she 
was no more, and he shouted, Tool!' He was 
greatly depressed. From behind the door I 
heard how he lay down on his bed groaning 
and loudly exclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn't I 
go in then? What could he have done to me? 
What could I have lost? And perhaps he would 
then have been comforted and would have 
said that word to me." And Princess Mary ut- 
tere^l aloud the caressing word he had said to 
her on the day of his death. "Dear-est!" she re- 
peated, and began sobbing, with tears that re- 
lieved her soul. She now saw his face before 
her. And not the face she had known ever since 
she coujp remember and had always seen at a 
distance, but the timid, feeble face she had 
seen for the first time quite closely, with all its 
wrinkles and details, when she stooped near to 
his mouth to catch v;hat he said. 

"Dear-estl" she repeated again. 

"What was he thinking when he uttered that 
word? What is he thinking now?" This ques- 
tion suddenly presented itself to her, and in 
answer she saw him before her with the expres- 
sion that was on his face as he lay in his coffin 
with his chin bound up with a white handker- 
chief. And the horror that had seized her when 
she touched him and convinced herself that 
that was not he, but something mysterious and 
horrible, seized her again. She tried to think of 
something else and to pray, but could do nei- 
ther. With wide-open eyes she gazed at the 
moonlight and the shadows, expecting every 
moment to see his dead face, and she felt that 
the silence brooding over the house and with- 
in it held her fast. 

"Dunydsha," she whispered. "Dunydshal" 
she screamed wildly, and tearing herself out of 
this silence she ran to the servants' quarters to 
meet her old nurse and the maidservants who 
came running toward her. 



CHAPTER XIII 

ON THE SEVENTEENTH OF AUGUST Rost6vand II- 
yin, accompanied by Lavrushka who had just 
returned from captivity and by an hussar or- 
derly, left their quarters at Yank6vo, ten miles 
from Bogucharovo, and went for a ride to try 
a new horse Ilyin had bought and to find out 
whether there was any hay to be had in the 
villages. 

For the last three days Boguchdrovo had lain 
between the two hostile armies, so that it was 
as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it as 
for the French vanguard; Rostov, as a careful 
squadron commander, wished to take such pro- 
visions as remained at Bogucharovo before the 
French could get them. 

Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of 
moods. On the way to BogucMrovo, a princely 
estate with a dwelling house and farm where 
they hoped to find many domestic serfs and 
pretty girls, they questioned Lavrushka about 
Napoleon and laughed at his stories, and raced 
one another to try Ilyfn's horse. 

Rost6v had no idea that the village he was 
entering was the property of that very Bolkon- 
ski who had been engaged to his sister. 

Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for 
a last race along the incline before reaching 
BogucMrovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin, 
was the first to gallop into the village street. 

"You're first!" cried Ilyfn, flushed. 

"Yes, always first both on the grassland and 
here," answered Rostov, stroking his heated 
Donets horse. 

"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your ex 
cellcncy," said Lavrushka from behind, allud- 
ing to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish 
to mortify you." 

They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a 
large crowd of peasants was standing. 

Some of the men bared their heads, others 
stared at the new arrivals without doffing their 
caps. Two tall old peasantswith wrinkled faces 
and scanty beards emerged from the tavern, 
smiling, staggering, and singing some incoher- 
ent song, and approached the officers. 

"Fine fellows!" said Rost6v laughing. "Is 
there any hay here?" 

"And how like one another," said Ilyin. 

"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa . . .1" sang one 
of the peasants with a blissful smile. 

One of the men came out of the crowd and 
went up to Rostov. 

"Who do you belong to?" he asked. 

"The French," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and 



418 



WAR AND PEACE 



here is Napoleon himself" and he pointed to 
Lavriishka. 

"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked 
again. 

"And is there a large force of you here?" said 
another, a short man, coming up. 

"Very large," answered Rost6v. "But why 
have you collected here?" he added. "Is it a 
holiday?" 

"The old men have met to talk over the busi- 
ness of the commune," replied the peasant, 
moving away. 

At that moment, on the road leading from 
the big house, two women and a man in a white 
hat were seen coming toward the officers. 

"The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said 
Ilyin on seeing Dunysha running resolutely 
toward him. 

"She'll be ours!" said Lavriishka to Ilyin, 
winking. 

"What do you want, ray pretty?" said Ilyin 
with a smile. 

"The princess ordered me to ask your regi- 
ment and your name." 

"This is Count Rost6v, squadron command- 
er, and I am your humble servant." 

"Co-o-om-pa-nyl" roared the tipsy peasant 
with a beatific smile as he looked at Ilyin talk- 
ing to the girl. Following Dunydsha, Alpatych 
advanced to Rost6v, having bared his head 
while still at a distance. 

"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" 
said he respectfully, but with a shade of con- 
tempt for the youthfulness of this officer and 
with a hand thrust into his bosom. "My mistress, 
daughter of General in Chief Prince Nicholas 
Bolk6nski who died on the fifteenth of this 
month, finding herself in difficulties owing to 
the boorishness of these people" he pointed 
to the peasants "asks you to come up to the 
house. . . . Won't you, please, ride on a little 
farther," said Alpdtych with a melancholy 
smile, "as it is not convenient in the presence 
of ... ?" He pointed to the two peasants who 
kept as close to him as horseflies to a horse. 

"Ahl . . . Alpdtych ... Ah, Ydkov Alpdtych 
. . . Grand! Forgive us for Christ's sake, eh?" 
said the peasants, smiling joyfully at him. 

Rost6v looked at the tipsy peasants and 
smiled. 

"Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" re- 
marked Alpdtychwith a staid air, as he pointed 
at the old men with his free hand. 

"No, there's not much to be amused at here," 
said Rostov, and rode on a little way. "What's 
the matter?" he asked. 



"I make bold to inform your honor that the 
rude peasants here don't wish to let the mis- 
tress leave the estate, and threaten to unharness 
her horses, so that though everything has been 
packed up since morning, her excellency can- 
not get away." 

"Impossible!" exclaimed Rost6v. 

"I have the honor to report to you the actual 
truth," said Alpdtych. 

Rost6v dismounted, gave his horse to the or- 
derly, and followed Alpatych to the house, 
questioning him as to the state of affairs. It ap- 
peared that the princess' offer of corn to the 
peasants the previous day, and her talk with 
Dron and at the meeting, had actually had so 
bad an effect that Dron had finally given up 
the keys and joined the peasants and had not 
appeared when Alpdtych sent for him; and 
that in the morning when the princess gave or- 
ders to harness for her journey, the peasants 
had come in a large crowd to the barn and sent 
word that they would not let her leave the vil- 
lage: that there was an order not to move, and 
that they would unharness the horses. Alpdtych 
had gone out to admonish them, but was told 
(it was chiefly Karp who did the talking, Dron 
not showing himself in the crowd) that they 
could not let the princess go, that there was an 
order to the contrary, but that if she stayed 
they would serve her as before and obey her 
in everything. 

At the moment when Rost6v and Ilyfn were 
galloping along the road, Princess Mary, de- 
spite the dissuasions of Alpatych, her nurse, and 
the maids, had given orders to harness and in- 
tended to start, but when the cavalrymen were 
espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the 
coachman ran away, and the women in the 
house began to wail. 

"Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" ex- 
claimed deeply moved voices as Rostov passed 
through the anteroom. 

Princess Mary was sitting helpless and be- 
wildered in the large sitting room, when Ros- 
t6v was shown in. She could not grasp who he 
was and why he had come, or what was happen- 
ing to her. When she saw his Russian face, and 
by his walk and the first words he uttered rec- 
ognized him as a man of her own class, she 
glanced at him with her deep radiant look and 
began speaking in a voice that faltered and 
trembled with emotion. This meeting imme- 
diately struck Rost6v as a romantic event. "A 
helpless girl overwhelmed with grief, left to the 
mercy of coarse, rioting peasants! And what a 
strange fate sent me here! What gentleness and 



BOOK TEN 



4'9 



nobility there are in her features and expres- 
sion!" thought he as he looked at her and lis- 
tened to her timid story. 

When she began to tell him that all this had 
happened the day after her father's funeral, her 
voiced trembled. She turned away, and then, 
as if fearing he might take her words as meant 
to move him to pity, looked at him with an ap- 
prehensive glance of inquiry. There were tears 
in Rost6v's eyes. Princess Mary noticed this 
and glanced gratefully at him with that radiant 
look which caused the plainness of her face to 
be forgotten. 

"I cannot express, Princess, how glad I am 
that I happened to ride here and am able to 
show my readiness to serve you," said Rost6v, 
rising. "Go when you please, and I give you my 
word of honor that no one shall dare to cause 
you annoyance if only you will allow me to 
act as your escort." And bowing respectfully, 
as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved toward 
the door. 

Rost6v's deferential tone seemed to indicate 
that though he would consider himself happy 
to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to 
take advantage of her misfortunes to intrude 
upon her. 

Princess Mary understood this and appreci- 
ated his delicacy. 

"I am very, very grateful to you," she said in 
French, "but I hope it was all a misunderstand- 
ing and that no one is to blame for it." She sud- 
denly began to cry. 

"Excuse me!" she said. 

Rost6v, knitting his brows, left the room 
with another low bow. 

CHAPTER XIV 

WELL, is she pretty? Ah, friendmy pink one 
is delicious; her name is Dunydsha " 

But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin 
stopped short. He saw that his hero and com- 
mander was following quite a different train 
of thought. 

Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyf n and without 
replying strode off with rapid steps to the vil- 
lage. 

"I'll show them; I'll give it to them, the brig- 
ands 1" said he to himself. 

Alpdtych at a gliding trot, only just manag- 
ing not to run,kept up with him with difficulty. 

"What decision have you been pleased to 
come to?" said he. 

Rost6v stopped and, clenching his fists, sud- 
denly and sternly turned on Alpdtych. 

"Decision? What decision? Old dotardl . . ." 



cried he. "What have you been about? Eh? The 
peasants are rioting, and you can't manage 
them? You're a traitor yourself 1 1 knowyou. I'll 
flay you all alive! . . ."And as if afraid of wasting 
his store of anger, he left Alpltych and went 
rapidly forward. Alpdtych, mastering his of- 
fended feelings, kept pace with Rost6v at a 
gliding gait and continued to impart his views. 
He said the peasants were obdurate and that at 
the present moment it would be imprudent to 
"overresist" them without an armed force, and 
would it not be better first to send for the mil- 
itary? 

"I'll give them armed force . . . I'll 'overresist' 
them!" uttered Rost6v meaninglessly, breath- 
less with irrational animal fury and the need 
to vent it. 

Without considering what he would do he 
moved unconsciously with quick, resolute steps 
toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to 
it the more Alpdtych felt that this unreason- 
able action might produce good results. The 
peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed 
when they saw Rostov's rapid, firm steps and 
resolute, frowning face. 

After the hussars had come to the village and 
Rostov had gone to see the princess, a certain 
confusion and dissension had arisen among the 
crowd. Some of the peasants said that these 
new arrivals were Russians and might take it 
amiss that the mistress was beingdetained. Dron 
was of this opinion, but as soon as he expressed 
it Karp and others attacked their ex-Elder. 

"How many years have you been fattening 
on the commune?" Karp shouted at him. "It's 
all one to you! You'll dig up your pot of money 
and take it away with you. . . . What does it 
matter to you whether our homes are ruined 
or not?" 

"We've been told to keep order, and that no 
one is to leave their homes or take away a sin- 
gle grain, and that's all about it!" cried anoth- 
er. 

"It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but 
no fear! You begrudged your lump of a son," a 
little old man suddenly began attacking Dron 
"and so they took my Viinka to be shaved for 
a soldier! But we all have to die." 

"To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not 
against the commune," said Dron. 

"That's it not against ill You've filled your 
belly. . . ." 

The two tall peasants had their say. As soon 
as Rost6v, followed by Ilyfn, Lavriishka, and 
Alpdtych, came up to the crowd, Karp, thrust- 
ing his fingers into his belt and smiling a lit- 



420 



tie, walked to the front. Dron on the contrary 
retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer 
together. 

"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted 
Rostdv, coming up to the crowd with quick 
steps. 

"The Elder? What do you want with 
him? . . ." asked Karp. 

But before the words were well out of his 
mouth, his cap flew off and a fierce blow jerked 
his head to one side. 

"Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rost6v in a 
wrathful voice. "Where's the Elder?" he cried 
furiously. 

"The Elder. ... He wants the Eldcrl . . . 
Dron Zakharych, you!" meek and flustered 
voices here and there were heard calling and 
caps began to come off their heads. 

"We don't riot, we're following the orders," 
declared Karp, and at that moment several 
voices began speaking together. 

"It's as the old men have decided there's 
too many of you giving orders." 

"Arguing? Mutiny! . . . Brigands! Traitors!" 
cried Rostov unmeaningly in a voice not his 
own, gripping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, 
bind him!" he shouted, though there was no 
one to bind him but Lavriishka and Alpdtych. 

Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and 
seized him by the arms from behind. 

"Shall I call up our men from beyond the 
hill?" he called out. 

Alpiitych turned to the peasants and ordered 
two of them by name to come and bind Karp. 
The men obediently came out of the crowd 
and began taking off their belts. 

"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rost6v in a 
loud voice. 

With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped 
out of the crowd. 

"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushkal" 
shouted Rost6v, as if that order, too, could not 
possibly meet with any opposition. 

And in fact two more peasants began bind- 
ing Dron, who took off his own belt and hand- 
ed it to them, as if to aid them. 

"And you all listen to me!" said Rost6v to 
the peasants. "Be off to your houses at once, 
and don't let one of your voices be heard! " 

"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it 
just out of foolishness. It's all nonsense. ... I 
said then that it was not in order," voices were 
heard bickering with one another. 

"There! What did I say?" said Alpdtych, 
coming into his own again. "It's wrong, lads!" 

"All our stupidity, Ykov Alpdtych," came 



WAR AND PEACE 

the answers, and the crowd began at once to 
disperse through the village. 

The two bound men were led off to the mas- 
ter's house. The two drunken peasants followed 
them. 

"Aye, when I look at you! . . ." said one of 
them to Karp. 

"How can one talk to the masters like that? 
What were you thinking of, you fool?" added 
the other "A real iool!" 

Two hours later the carts were standing in 
the courtyard of the Boguchdrovo house. The 
peasants were briskly carrying out the propri- 
etor's goods and packing themon the carts, and 
Dron, liberated at Princess Mary's wish from 
the cupboard where he had been confined, was 
standing in the yard directing the men. 

"Don't put it in so carelessly," said oneof the 
peasants, a man with a round smiling face, tak- 
ing a casket from a housemaid. "You know it 
has cost money! How can you chuck it in like 
that or shove it under the cord where it'll get 
rubbed? I don't like that way of doing things. 
Let it all be done properly, according to rule. 
Look here, put it under the bast matting and 
cover it with hay that's the way!" 

"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, 
bringing out Prince Andrew's library cup- 
boards. "Don't catch up against it! It's heavy, 
lads solid books." 

"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" 
remarked the tall, round-faced peasant gravely, 
pointing with a significant wink at the diction- 
aries that were on the top. 



Unwilling to obtrude himself on the prin- 
cess, Rost6v did not go back to the house but 
remained in the village awaiting her depar- 
ture. When her carriage drove out of the house, 
he mounted and accompanied her eight miles 
from Boguchdrovo to where the road was occu- 
pied by our troops. At the inn at Yank6vo he 
respectfully took leave of her, for the first time 
permitting himself to kiss her hand. 

"How can you speak so!" he blushingly re- 
plied to Princess Mary's expressions of grati- 
tude for her deliverance, as she termed what 
had occurred. "Any police officer would have 
done as much! If we had had only peasants to 
fight, we should not have let the enemy come 
so far," said he with a sense of shame and wish- 
ing to change the subject. "I am only happy to 
have had the opportunity of making your ac- 
quaintance. Good-by, Princess. I wish you hap- 
piness and consolation and hope to meet you 
again in happier circumstances. If you don't 



BOOK TEN 



421 



want to make me blush, please don't thank 
me!" 

But the princess, if she did not again thank 
him in words, thanked him with the whole ex- 
pression of her face, radiant with gratitude and 
tenderness. She could not believe that there 
was nothing to thank him for. On the contrary, 
it seemed to her certain that had he not been 
there she would have perished at the hands of 
the mutineers and of the French, and that he 
had exposed himself to terrible and obvious 
danger to save her, and even more certain was 
it that he was a man of lofty and noble soul, 
able to understand her position and her sor- 
row. His kind, honest eyes, with the tears ris- 
ing in them when she herself had begun to cry 
as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her mem- 
ory. 

When she had taken leave of him and re- 
mained alone she suddenly felt her eyes filling 
with tears, and then not for the first time the 
strange question presented itself to her: did 
she love him? 

On the rest of the way to Moscow, though 
the princess' position was not a cheerful one, 
Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriage, 
more than once noticed that her mistress leaned 
out of the window and smiled at something 
with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow. 

"Well, supposing I do love him?" thought 
Princess Mary. 

Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to her- 
self that she had fallen in love with a man who 
would perhaps never love her, she comforted 
herself with the thought that no one would 
ever know it and that she would not be to 
blame if, without ever speaking of it to any- 
one, she continued to the end of her life to 
love the man with whom she had fallen in love 
for the first and last time in her life. 

Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his 
sympathy, and his words, happiness did not 
appear impossible to her. It was at those mo- 
ments that Dunyasha noticed her smiling as 
she looked out of the carriage window. 

"Was it not fate that brought him to Bogu- 
chdrovo, and at that very moment?" thought 
Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister to 
refuse my brother?" 1 And in all this Princess 
Mary saw the hand of Providence. 

The impression the princess made on Ros- 
t6v was a very agreeable one. To remember 
her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, 
hearing of his adventure at Boguchdrovo, ral- 

*A woman might not marry her brother's or 
sister's brother-in-law and vice versa. TR. 



lied him on having gone to look for hay and 
having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses 
in Russia, he grew angry. It made him angry 
just because the idea of marrying the gentle 
Princess Mary, who was attractive to him and 
had an enormous fortune, had against his will 
more than once entered his head. For himself 
personally Nicholas could not wish for a better 
wife: by marrying her he would make the 
countess his mother happy, would be able to 
put his father's affairs in order, and would even 
he felt it ensure Princess Mary's happiness. 
But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was 
why Rostov grew angry when he was rallied 
about Princess Bolk6nskaya. 

CHAPTER XV 

ON RECEIVING COMMAND of the armies Kutiizov 
remembered Prince Andrew and sent an order 
for him to report at headquarters. 

Prince Andrew arrived at Tsdrevo-Zaymish- 
che on the very day and at the very hour that 
Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the first 
time. He stopped in the village at the priest's 
house in front of which stood the commander 
in chief's carriage, and he sat down on the 
bench at the gate awaiting his Serene High- 
ness, as everyone now called Kutuzov, From 
the field beyond the village came now sounds 
of regimental music and now the roar of many 
voices shouting "Hurrah!" to the new com- 
mander in chief. Two orderlies, a courier and 
a major-domo, stood near by, some ten paces 
from Prince Andrew, availing themselves of 
Kutiizov's absence and of the fine weather. A 
short, swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars 
with thick mustaches and whiskers rode up 
to the gate and, glancing at Prince Andrew, in- 
quired whether his Serene Highness was put- 
ting up there and whether he would soon be 
back. 

Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his 
Serene Highness' staff but was himself a new 
arrival. The lieutenant colonel turned to a 
smart orderly, who, with the peculiar contempt 
with which a commander in chief's orderly 
speaks to officers, replied: 

"What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll 
be here soon. What do you want?" 

The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled be- 
neath his mustache at the orderly's tone, dis- 
mounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, 
and approached Bolk6nski with a slight bow. 
Bolk6nski made room for him on the bench 
and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside 
him. 



422 



WAR AND PEACE 



"You're also waiting for the commander in 
chief?" said he. "They say he weceives evewy- 
one, thank Godl . . . It's awful with those sau- 
sage eaters! Ermolov had weason to ask to be 
pwomoted to be a German! Now p'waps Wus- 
sians will get a look in. As it was, devil only 
knows what was happening. We kept wetweat- 
ing and wetweating. Did you take part in the 
campaign?" he asked. 

"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, 
"not only of taking part in the retreat but of 
losing in that retreat all I held dear not to 
mention the estate and home of my birth my 
father, who died of grief. I belong to the prov- 
ince of Smolensk." 

"Ah? You're Pwince Bolk6nski? Vcwy glad 
to make your acquaintance! I'm Lieutenant 
Colonel Denfsov, better known as 'Vaska,' " 
said Denisov, pressing Prince Andrew's hand 
and looking into his face with a particularly 
kindly attention. "Yes, I heard," said he sym- 
pathetically, and after a short pause added: 
"Yes, it's Scythian warfare. It's all vcwy well 
only not for those who get it in the neck. 
So you are Pwince Andwew Bolk6nski?" He 
swayed his head. "Vewy pleased, Pwince, to 
make your acquaintance!" he repeated again, 
smiling sadly, and he again pressed Prince An- 
drew's hand. 

Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Na- 
tasha had told him of her first suitor. This 
memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to 
those painful feelings of which he had not 
thought lately, but which still found place in 
his souL Of late he had received so many new 
and very serious impressions such as the re- 
treat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills, 
and the recent news of his father's death and 
had experienced so many emotions, that for a 
long time past those memories had not entered 
his mind, and now that they did, they did not 
act on him with nearly their former strength. 
For Denisov, too, the memories awakened by 
the name of Bolk6nski belonged to a distant, 
romantic past, when after supper and after 
Natasha's singing he had proposed to a little 
girl of fifteen without realizing what he was 
doing. He smiled at the recollection of that 
time and of his love for Natdsha, and passed at 
once to what now interested him passionately 
and exclusively. This was a plan of campaign 
he had devised while serving at the outposts 
during the retreat. He had proposed that plan 
to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to pro- 
pose it to Kutiizov. The plan was based on the 
fact that the French line of operation was too 



extended, and it proposed that instead of, or 
concurrently with, action on the front to bar 
the advance of the French, we should attack 
their line of communication. He began ex- 
plaining his plan to Prince Andrew. 

"They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. 
I will undertake to bweak thwough. Give me 
five hundwed men and I will bweak the line, 
that's certain! There's only one way guewilla 
warfare!" 

Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he 
explained his plan to Bolk6nski. In the midst 
of his explanation shouts were heard from the 
army, growing more incoherent and more dif- 
fused, mingling with music and songs and com- 
ing from the field where the review was held. 
Sounds of hoofs and shouts were nearing the 
village. 

"He's coming! He's coming!" shouted a Cos- 
sack standing at the gate. 

Bolk6nski and Denisov moved to the gate, at 
which a knot of soldiers (a guard of honor) was 
standing, and they saw Kutiizov coming down 
the street mounted on a rather small sorrel 
horse. A huge suite of generals rode behind 
him. Barclay was riding almost beside him, and 
a crowd of officers ran after and around them 
shouting, "Hurrah!" 

His adjutants galloped into the yard be- 
fore him. Kutiizov was impatiently urging on 
his horse, which ambled smoothly under his 
weight, and he raised his hand to his white 
Horse Guard's cap with a red band and no 
peak, nodding his head continually. When he 
came up to the guard of honor, a fine set of 
Grenadiers mostly wearing decorations, who 
were giving him the salute, he looked at them 
silently and attentively for nearly a minute 
with the steady gaze of a commander and then 
turned to the crowd of generals and officers 
surrounding him. Suddenly his face assumed 
a subtle expression, he shrugged his shoulders 
with an air of perplexity. 

"And with such fine fellows to retreat and 
retreat! Well, good-by, General," he added, 
and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and 
Denisov. 

"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! "shouted those be- 
hind him. 

Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Ku- 
tiizov had grown still more corpulent, flaccid, 
and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, and 
the familiar weariness of his expression were 
still the same. He was wearing the white Horse 
Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a 
whip hanging over his shoulder by a thin strap. 



BOOK TEN 



423 



He sat heavily and swayed limply on his brisk 
little horse. 

"Whew . . . whew . . . whew I" he whistled 
just audibly as he rode into the yard. His face 
expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a 
man who means to rest after a ceremony. He 
drew his left foot out of the stirrup and, lurch- 
ing with his whole body and puckering his face 
with the effort, raised it with difficulty onto the 
saddle, leaned on his knee, groaned, and si ipped 
down into the arms of the Cossacks and adju- 
tants who stood ready to assist him. 

He pulled himself together, looked round, 
screwing up his eyes, glanced at Prince An- 
drew, and, evidently not recognizing him, 
moved with his waddling gait to the porch. 
"Whew . . . whew . . . whew!" he whistled, and 
again glanced at Prince Andrew. As often oc- 
curs with old men, it was only after some sec- 
onds that the impression produced by Prince 
Andrew's face linked itself up with Kutiizov's 
remembrance of his personality. 

"Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How 
do you do, my dear boy? Come along . . ." said 
he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped on- 
to the porch which creaked under his weight. 

He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a 
bench in the porch. 

"And how's your father?" 

"I received news of his death, yesterday," re- 
plied Prince Andrew abruptly. 

Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open 
with dismay and then took off his cap and 
crossed himself: 

"May the kingdom of Heaven be hisl God's 
will be done to us all!" He sighed deeply, his 
whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. 
"I loved him and respected him, and sympa- 
thize with you with all my heart." 

He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him 
to his fat breast, and for some time did not let 
him go. When he released him Prince Andrew 
saw that Kutuzov's flabby lips were trembling 
and that tears were in his eyes, He sighed and 
pressed on the bench with both hands to 
raise himself. 

"Cornel Come with me, we'll have a talk," 
said he. 

But at that moment Denfsov, no more in- 
timidated by his superiors than by the enemy, 
came with jingling spurs up the steps of the 
porch, despite the angry whispers of the ad- 
jutants who tried to stop him. Kutuzov, his 
hands still pressed on the seat, glanced at him 
glumly. Denfsov, having given his name, an- 
nounced that he had to communicate to his 



Serene Highness a matter of great importance 
for their country's welfare. Kutuzov looked 
wearily at him arid, lifting his hands with a 
gesture of annoyance, folded them across his 
stomach, repeating the words: "For our coun- 
try's welfare? Well, what is it? Speak!" Den- 
isov blushed like a girl (it was strange to see 
the color rise in that shaggy, bibulous, time- 
worn face) and boldly began to expound his 
plan of cutting the enemy's lines of communi- 
cation between Smolensk and Vydzma. Denisov 
came from those parts and knew the country 
well. His plan seemed decidedly a good one, es- 
pecially from the strength of conviction with 
which he spoke. Kutuzov looked down at his 
own legs, occasionally glancing at the door of 
the adjoining hut as if expecting something 
unpleasant to emerge from it. And from that 
hut, while Denfsov was speaking, a general with 
a portfolio under his arm really did appear. 

"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Den- 
isov 's explanations, "are you ready so soon?" 

"Ready, your Serene Highness," replied the 
general. 

Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: 
"How is one man to deal with it all?" and 
again listened to Denfsov. 

"I give my word of honor as a Wussian of- 
ficer," said Denfsov, "that I can bweak Na- 
poleon's line of communication!" 

"What relation are you to Intendant Gen- 
eral Kirfl A ndre*evich Denisov?" asked Kutuzov, 
interrupting him. 

"He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness." 

"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheer- 
fully. "All right, all right, friend, stay here at 
the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk." 

With a nod to Denfsov he turned away and 
put out his hand for the papers Konovnftsyn 
had brought him. 

"Would not your Serene Highness like to 
come inside?" said the general on duty in a dis- 
contented voice, "the plans must be examined 
and several papers have to be signed." 

An adjutant came out and announced that 
everything was in readiness within. But Kutu- 
zov evidently did not wish to enter that room 
till he was disengaged. He made a grimace 

"No, tell them to bring a small table out 
here, my dear boy. I'll look at them here," said 
he. "Don't go away," he added, turning to 
Prince Andrew, who remained in the porch 
and listened to the general's report. 

While this was being given, Prince Andrew 
heard the whisper of a woman's voice and the 
rustle of a silk dress behind the door. Several 



424 



WAR AND PEACE 



times on glancing that way he noticed behind 
that door a plump, rosy, handsome woman in 
a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her 
head, holding a dish and evidently awaiting 
the entrance of the commander in chief. Ku- 
tuzov's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew 
that this was the wite of the priest whose home 
it was, and that she intended to offer his Se- 
rene Highness bread and salt. "Her husband 
has welcomed his Serene Highness with the 
cross at the church, and she intends to wel- 
come him in the house. , . . She's very pretty," 
added the adjutant with a smile. At those words 
Kutuzov looked round. He was listening to the 
general's reportwhich consisted chiefly of a 
criticism of the position at Tsarevo-Zay- 
mishche as he had listened to Denfsov, and 
seven years previously had listened to the dis- 
cussion at the Austerlitz council of war. He 
evidently listened only because he had ears 
which, though there was a piece of tow in one 
of them, could not help hearing; but it was ev- 
ident that nothing the general could say would 
surprise or even interest him, that he knew all 
that would be said beforehand, and heard it all 
only because he had to, as one has to listen to 
the chanting of a service of prayer. All that 
Denisov had said was clever and to the point. 
What the general was saying was even more 
clever and to the point, but it was evident that 
Kutuzov despised knowledge and cleverness, 
and knew of something else that would decide 
the matter something independent of clever- 
ness and knowledge. Prince Andrew watched 
the commander in chief's face attentively, and 
the only expression he could see there was one 
of boredom, curiosity as to the meaning of the 
feminine whispering behind the door, and a 
desire to observe propriety. It was evident that 
Kutuzov despised cleverness and learning and 
even the patriotic feeling shown by Denisov, 
but despised them not because of his own in- 
tellect, feelings, or knowledge he did not try 
to display any of these but because of some- 
thing else. He despised them because of his 
old age and experience of life. The only in- 
struction Kutuzov gave of his own accord dur- 
ing that report referred to looting by the Rus- 
sian troops. At the end of the report the gen- 
eral put before him for signature a paper re- 
lating to the recovery of payment from army 
commanders for green oats mown down by the 
soldiers, when landowners lodged petitions 
for compensation. 

After hearing the matter, Kutiizov smacked 
his lips together and shook his head. 



"Into the stove . . . into the fire with itl I tell 
you once for all, my dear fellow," said he, "in- 
to the fire with all such things! Let them cut 
the crops and burn wood to their hearts' con- 
tent. I don't order it or allow it, but I don't 
exact compensation either. One can't get on 
without it. 'When wood is chopped the chips 
will fly.' " He looked at the paper again. "Oh, 
this German precision!" he muttered, shaking 
his head. 

CHAPTER XVI 

"WELL, THAT'S ALL!" said Kutiizov as he signed 
the last of the documents, and rising heavily 
and smoothing out the folds in his fat white 
neck he moved toward the door with a more 
cheerful expression. 

The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught 
up the dish she had after all not managed to 
present at the right moment, though she had 
so long been preparing for it, and with a low 
bow offered it to Kutuzov. 

He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her 
chin with his hand, and said: 

"Ah, what a beauty I Thank you, sweetheart!" 

He took some gold pieces from his trouser 
pocket and put them on the dish for her. 
"Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" 
he asked, moving to the door of the room as- 
signed to him. The priest's wife smiled, and 
with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him 
into the room. The adjutant came out to the 
porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with 
him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was 
again called to Kutuzov. He found him reclin- 
ing in an armchair, still in the same unbut- 
toned overcoat. He had in his hand a French 
book which he closed as Prince Andrew en- 
tered, marking the place with a knife. Prince 
Andrew saw by the cover that it was Les Chev- 
aliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis. 

"Well, sit clown, sit down here. Let's have a 
talk," said Kutuzov. "It's sad, very sad. But re- 
member, my clear fellow, that I am a father to 
you, a second father. . . ." 

Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of 
his father's death, and what he had seen at 
Bald Hills when he passed through it. 

"What . . . what they have brought us to!" 
Kutuzov suddenly cried in an agitated voice, 
evidently picturing vividly to himself from 
Prince Andrew's story the condition Russia was 
in. "But give me time, give me time!" he said 
with a grim look, Evidently not wishing to con- 
tinue this agitating conversation, and added: 
"I sent for you to keep you with me." 



BOOK 

"I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I 
am no longer fit for the staff," replied Prince 
Andrew with a smile which Kuttizov noticed. 

Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him. 

"But above all," added Prince Andrew, "I 
have grown used to my regiment, am fond of 
the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I 
should be sorry to leave the regiment. If I de- 
cline the honor of being with you, believe 
me . . ." 

A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expres- 
sion lit up Kutuzov's podgy face. He cut Bol- 
k6nski short. 

"I am sorry, for I need you. But you're right, 
you're right! It's not here that men are needed. 
Advisers are always plentiful, but men are not. 
The regiments would not be what they are if 
the would-be advisers served there as you do. 
I remember you at Austerlitz. ... I remember, 
yes, I remember you with the standard!" said 
Kutuzov, and a flush of pleasure suffused 
Prince Andrew's face at this recollection. 

Taking his hand and drawing him down- 
wards, Kutuzov offered his cheek to be kissed, 
and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the 
old man's eyes. Though Prince Andrew knew 
that Kutuzov's tears came easily, and that he 
was particularly tender to and considerate of 
him from a wish to show sympathy with his loss, 
yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both pleas- 
ant and flattering to him. 

"Go your way and God be with you. I know 
your path is the path of honor!" He paused. "I 
missed you at Bucharest, but I needed some- 
one to send." And changing the subject, Kutu- 
zov began to speak of the Turkish war and the 
peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have 
been much blamed," he said, "both for that 
war and the peace . . . but everything came at 
the right time. Tout vient a point &amp; celui qui 
salt attendre? And there were as many advisers 
there as here . . ." he went on, returning to the 
subject of "advisers" which evidently occupied 
him. "Ah, those advisers!" said he. "If we had 
listened to them all we should not have made 
peace with Turkey and should not have been 
through with that war. Everything in haste, 
but more haste, less speed. Kamenski would 
have been lost if he had not died. He 
stormed fortresses with thirty thousand men. 
It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is 
difficult to win a campaign. For that, not storm- 
ing and attacking but patience and time are 
wanted. Kdmenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk, 

1 "Everything comes in time to him who knows 
how to wait," 



TEN 425 

but I only employed these two things and took 
more fortresses than Kdmenski and made the 
Turks eat horseflesh I" He swayed his head. 
"And the French shall too, believe me," he 
went on, growing warmer and beating his 
chest, "I'll make them eat horseflesh!" And 
tears again dimmed his eyes. 

"But shan't we have to accept battle?" re- 
marked Prince Andrew. 

"We sha'll if everybody wants it; it can't be 

helped But believe me, my dear boy, there 

is nothing stronger than those two: patience 
and time, they will do it all. But the advisers 
n'entendent pas de cette oreille, voiia le mal* 
Some want a thing others don't. What's one 
to do?" he asked, evidently expecting an an- 
swer. "Well, what do you want us to do?" he 
repeated and his eye shone with a deep, shrewd 
look. "I'll tell you what to do," he continued, 
as Prince Andrcwstill did not reply: "I will tell 
you what to do, and what I do. Dans le doute, 
mon cher," he paused, "abstiens-toi" 8 he ar- 
ticulated the French proverb deliberately. 

"Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember 
that with all my heart I share your sorrow, and 
that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a 
prince, nor a commander in chief, but a father! 
If you want anything come straight to me. 
Good-by, my dear boy." 

Again he embraced and kissed Prince An- 
drew, but before the latter had left the room 
Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with 
his unfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne 
by Madame de Gcnlis. 

Prince Andrew could not have explained 
how or why it was, but after that interview 
with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment re- 
assured as to the general course of affairs and 
as to the man to whom it had been entrusted. 
The more he realized the absence of all per- 
sonal motive in that old man in whom there 
seemed to remain only the habit of passions, 
and in place of an intellect (grouping events 
and drawing conclusions) only the capacity 
calmly to contemplate the course of events 
the more reassured he was that everything 
would be as it should. "He will not bring in 
any plan of his own. He will not devise or un- 
dertake anything," thought Prince Andrew, 
"but he will hear everything, remember every- 
thing, and put everything in its place. He will 
not hinder anything useful nor allow anything 
harmful. He understands that there is some- 
thing stronger and more important than his 

a "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble." 

8 "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing," 



426 



WAR AND PEACE 



own will the inevitable course of events, and 
he can see them and grasp their significance, 
and seeing that significance can refrain from 
meddling and renounce his personal wish di- 
rected to something else. And above all," 
thought Prince Andrew, "one believes in him 
because he's Russian, despite the novel byGen- 
lis and the French proverbs, and because his 
voice shook when he said: 'What they have 
brought us to!' and had a sob in it when he 
said he would 'make them eat horseflesh!' " 

On such feelings, more or less dimly shared 
by all, the unanimity and general approval 
were founded with which, despite court influ- 
ences, the popular choice of Kutiizov as com- 
mander in chief was received. 

CHAPTER XVII 

AFTER THE EMPEROR had left Moscow, life 
flowed on there in its usual course, and its 
course was so very usual that it was difficult to 
remember the recent days of patriotic elation 
and ardor, hard to believe that Russia was real- 
ly in danger and that the members of the Eng- 
lish Club were also sons of the Fatherland 
ready to sacrifice everything for it. The one 
thing that recalled the patriotic fervor every- 
one had displayed during the Emperor's stay 
was the call for contributions of men and 
money, a necessity that as soon as the prom- 
ises had been made assumed a legal, official 
form and became unavoidable. 

With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the 
Moscovites' view of their situation did not 
grow more serious but on the contrary became 
even more frivolous, as always happens with 
people who see a great danger approaching. 
At the approach of danger there are always 
two voices that speak with equal power in the 
human soul: one very reasonably tells a man 
to consider the nature of the danger and the 
means of escaping it; the other, still more 
reasonably, says that it is too depressing and 
painful to think of the danger, since it is not 
in man's power to foresee everything and avert 
the general course of events, and it is therefore 
better to disregard what is painful till it comes, 
and to think about what is pleasant. In solitude 
a man generally listens to the first voice, but in 
society to the second. So it was now with the 
inhabitants of Moscow. It was long since peo- 
ple had been as gay in Moscow as that year. 

Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by wood- 
cuts of a drink shop, a potman, and a Moscow 
burgher called Karpiishka Chigirin, "who 
having been a militiaman and having had rath- 



er too much at the pub heard that Napoleon 
wished to come to Moscow, grew angry , abused 
the French in very bad language f came out of 
the drink shop, and, under the sign of the ea- 
gle, began to address the assembled people" 
were read and discussed, together with the lat- 
est of Vasfli Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rime's. 

In the corner room at the Club, members 
gathered to read these broadsheets, and some 
liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French, 
saying: "They will swell up with Russian cab- 
bage, burst with our buckwheat porridge, and 
choke themselves with cabbage soup. They are 
all dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss 
three of them with a hayfork/' Others did not 
like that tone and said itwas stupid and vulgar. 
It was said that Rostopchfn had expelled all 
Frenchmen and even all foreigners from Mos- 
cow, and that there had been some spies and 
agents of Napoleon among them; but this was 
told chiefly to introduce Rostopchfn's witty re- 
mark on that occasion. The foreigners were 
deported to Nizhni by boat, and Rostopchin 
had said to them in French: "Rentrez en vous- 
mSmes; entrez dans la barque, et n'en faites 
pas une barque de Charon." * There was talk 
of all the government offices having been al- 
ready removed from Moscow, and to this Shin- 
shfn's witticism was added that for that alone 
Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon. It 
was said that Mam6nov's regiment would cost 
him eight hundred thousand rubles, and that 
Bezukhov had spent even more on his, but that 
the best thing about Beziikhov's action was 
that he himself was going to don a uniform 
and ride at the head of his regiment without 
charging anything for the show. 

"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Dru- 
betskdya as she collected and pressed together 
a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringed 
fingers. 

Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next 
day and was giving a farewell soiree. 

"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and 
good-natured. What pleasure is there to be so 
caustique?" 

"A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia 
uniform whom Julie called "mon chevalier," 
and who was going with her to Nizhni. 

In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Mos- 
cow, it had been agreed that they would speak 
nothing but Russian and that those who made 
a slip and spoke French should pay fines to the 
Committee of Voluntary Contributions. 

1 "Think it over; get into the barque, and take 
care not to make it a barque of Charon." 



BOOK TEN 



4*7 



"Another forfeit for a Gallicism/' said a Rus- 
sian writer who was present. " 'What pleasure 
is there to be' is not Russian I" 

"You spare no one," continued Julie to the 
young man without heeding the author's re- 
mark. * 

"For caustiqueI am guilty and will pay, 
and I am prepared to pay again for the pleas- 
ure of telling you the truth. For Gallicisms I 
won't be responsible," she remarked, turning to 
the author: "I have neither the money nor the 
time, like Prince GaHtsyn, to engage a master 
to teach me Russian!" 

"Ah, here he isl" she added. "Quand on ... 
No, no," she said to the militia officer, "you 
won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see 
its rays I "and she smiled amiably at Pierre. "We 
were just talking of you," she said with the fa- 
cility in lying natural to a society woman. "We 
were saying that your regiment would be sure 
to be better than Mam6nov's." 

"Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," re- 
plied Pierre, kissing his hostess' hand and tak- 
ing a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it." 

"You will, of course, command it yourself?" 
said Julie, directing a sly, sarcastic glance to- 
ward the militia officer, 

The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to 
be caustic, and his face expressed perplexity 
as to what Julie's smile might mean. In spite 
of his absent-mindedness and good nature, Pi- 
erre's personality immediately checked any at- 
tempt to ridicule him to his face. 

"No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at 
his big, stout body. "I should make too good a 
target for the French, besides I am afraid I 
should hardly be able to climb onto a horse." 

Among those whom Julie's guests happened 
to choose to gossip about were the Rost6vs. 

"I hear that their affairs are in a very bad 
way," said Julie. "And he is so unreasonable, 
the count himself I mean. The Razum6vskis 
wanted to buy his house and his estate near 
Moscow, but it drags on and on. He asks too 
much." 

"No, I think the sale will come off in a few 
days," said someone, "Though it is madness to 
buy anything in Moscow now." 

"Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Mos- 
cow is in danger?" 

"Then why are you leaving?" 

"I? What a question! I am going because . . . 
well, because everyone is going: and besides 
I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon." 

"Well, of course, of course! Let me have 
some more strips of linen." 



"If he manages the business properly he will 
be able to pay off all his debts," said the militia 
officer, speaking of Rost6v. 

"A kindly old man but not up to much. And 
why do they stay on so long in Moscow? They 
meant to leave for the country long ago. Na- 
talie is quite well again now, isn't she?" Julie 
asked Pierre with a knowing smile. 

"They are waiting for their younger son," 
Pierre replied. "He joined Obotenski's Cos- 
sacks and went to Bdlaya Tsrkov where the 
regiment is being formed. But now they have 
had him transferred to my regiment and are 
expecting him every day. The count wanted to 
leave long ago, but the countess won't on any 
account leave Moscow till her son returns." 

"I met them the day before yesterday at the 
Arkharovs'. Natalie has recovered her looks and 
is brighter. She sang a song. How easily some 
people get over everything!" 

"Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking 
displeased. 

Julie smiled. 

"You know, Count, such knights as you are 
only found in Madame de Souza's novels." 

"What knights? What do you mean?" de- 
manded Pierre, blushing. 

"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de 
tout Moscou. Je vous admire, ma parole d'hon- 
neur!" * 

"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer. 

"All right, one can't talk how tiresome!" 

"What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre 
asked angrily, rising to his feet. 

"Come now, Count, you know!" 

"I don't know anything about it," said Pi- 
erre. 

"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and 
so ... but I was always more friendly with Vera 
that dear Wra." 

"No, madamel" Pierre continued in a tone 
of displeasure, "I have not taken on myself the 
role of Natalie Rost6va's knight at all, and 
have not been to their house for nearly a month. 
But I cannot understand the cruelty . . ." 

"Qwe s' excuse s' accuse" a said Julie, smiling 
and waving the lint triumphantly, and to 
have the last word she promptly changed the 
subject. "Do you know what I heard today? 
Poor Mary Bolk6nskaya arrived in Moscow 
yesterday. Do you know that she has lost her 
father?" 

"Really? Where is she? I should like very 

1 "It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I ad- 
mire you!" 
* "Who excuses himself, accuses himself." 



428 

much to see her," said Pierre. 

"I spent the evening with her yesterday. She 
is going to their estate near Moscow either to- 
day or tomorrow morning, with her nephew." 

"Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre. 

"She is well, but sad. But do you know who 
rescued her? It is quite a romance. Nicholas 
Rost6v! She was surrounded, and they wanted 
to kill her and had wounded some of her peo- 
ple. He rushed in and saved her. . . ." 

"Another romance," said the militia officer. 
"Really, this general flight has been arranged 
to get all the old maids married off. Catiche is 
one and Princess Bolkonskaya another." 

"Do you know, I really believe she is un pe- 
tit pen amoureuse du jeune homme." 8 

"Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!" 

"But how could one say that in Russian?" 

CHAPTER XVIII 

WHEN PIERRE returned home he was handed 
two of Rostopchin's broadsheets that had been 
brought that day. 

The first declared that the report that Count 
Rostopchin had forbidden people to leave 
Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad 
that ladies and tradesmen's wives were leaving 
the city. "There will be less panic and less gos- 
sip," ran the broadsheet, "but I will stake my 
lifeon it that that scoundrel will not enter Mos- 
cow." These words showed Pierre clearly for 
the first time that the French would enter Mos- 
cow. The second broadsheet stated that our 
headquarters were at Vydzma, that Count Witt- 
genstein had defeated the French, but that as 
many of the inhabitants of Moscow wished to 
be armed, weapons were ready for them at the 
arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets which 
could be had at a low price. The tone of the 
proclamation was not as jocose as in the former 
Chigirin talks. Pierre pondered over these 
broadsheets. Evidently the terrible stormcloud 
he had desired with the whole strength of his 
soul but which yet aroused involuntary horror 
in him was drawing near. 

"Shall I join the army and enter the service, 
or wait?" he asked himself for the hundredth 
time. He took a pack of cards that lay on the 
table and began to lay them out for a game of 
patience. 

"If this patience comes out," he said to him- 
self after shuffling the cards, holding them in 
his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comes out, 
it means . . . what does it mean?" 

He had not decided what it should mean 

8 "A little bit in love with the young man." 



WAR AND PEACE 



when he heard the voice of the eldest princess 
at the door asking whether she might come in. 

"Then it will mean that I must go to the ar- 
my," said Pierre to himself. "Come in, come 
in!" he added to the princess. 

Only the eldest princess, the one with the 
stony face and long waist, was still living in 
Pierre's house. The two younger ones had both 
married. 

"Excuse my coming to you, cousin," she said 
in a reproachful and agitated voice. "You 
know some decision must be come to. What is 
going to happen? Everyone has left Moscow 
and the people are rioting. How is it that we 
are staying on?" 

"On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, 
ma cousine," said Pierre in the bantering tone 
he habitually adopted toward her, always feel- 
ing uncomfortable in the role of her benefac- 
tor. 

"Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Bar- 
bara Ivanovna told me today how our troops 
are distinguishing themselves. It certainly does 
them credit! And the people too are quite mu- 
tinousthey no longer obey, even my maid has 
taken to being rude. At this rate they will soon 
begin beating us. One can't walk in the streets. 
But, above all, the French will be here any 
day now, so what are we waiting for? I ask just 
one thing of you, cousin," she went on, "ar- 
range for me to be taken to Petersburg. What- 
ever I may be, I can't live under Bonaparte's 
rule." 

"Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get 
your information from? On the contrary . . ." 

"I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others 
may if they please. ... If you don't want to do 
this . . ." 

"But I will, I'll give the order at once." 

The princess was apparently vexed at not 
having anyone to be angry with. Muttering to 
herself, she sat down on a chair. 

"But you have been misinformed," said 
Pierre. "Everything is quiet in the city and 
there is not the slightest danger. See! I've just 
been reading . . ." He showed her the broad- 
sheet. "Count Rostopchfn writes that he will 
stake his life on it that the enemy will not en- 
ter Moscow." 

"Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess 
malevolently. "He is a hypocrite, a rascal who 
has himself roused the people to riot. Didn't he 
write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 
'whoever it might be, should be dragged to the 
lockup by his hair? (How silly!) 'And honor 
and glory to whoever captures him/ he says. 



BOOK TEN 



This is what his cajolery has brought us to! 
Barbara Ivdnovna told me the mob nearly 
killed her because she said something in 
French." 

"Oh, but it's so ... You take everything so to 
heart," said Pierre, and began laying out his 
cards for patience. 

Although that patience did come out, Pierre 
did not join the army, but remained in desert- 
ed Moscow ever in the same state of agitation, 
irresolution, and alarm, yet at the same time 
joyfully expecting something terrible. 

Next day toward evening the princess set off, 
and Pierre's head steward came to inform him 
that the money needed for the equipment of 
his regiment could not be found without selling 
one of the estates. In general the head steward 
made out to Pierre that his project of raising a 
regiment would ruin him. Pierre listened to 
him, scarcely able to repress a smile. 

"Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be 
done? I can't draw back now!" 

The worse everything became, especially his 
own affairs, the better was Pierre pleased and 
the more evident was it that the catastrophe he 
expected was approaching. Hardly anyone he 
knew was left in town. Julie had gone, and so 
had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends on- 
ly the Rost6vs remained, but he did not go to 
see them. 

To distract his thoughts he drove that day 
to the village of Voronts6vo to see the great 
balloon Leppich was constructing to destroy 
the foe, and a trial balloon that was to go up 
next day. The balloon was not yet ready, but 
Pierre learned that it was being constructed by 
the Emperor's desire. The Emperor had writ- 
ten to Count Rostopchin as follows: 

As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew 
of reliable and intelligent men for his car and send 
a courier to General Kutuzov to let him know. I 
have informed him of the matter. 

Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful 
where he descends for the first time, that he may 
not make a mistake and fall into the enemy's 
hands. It is essential for him to combine his move- 
ments with those of the commander in chief. 

On his way home from Voronts6vo, as he was 
passing the Bol6tnoe Place Pierre, seeing a 
large crowd round the L6bnoe Place, stopped 
and got out of his trap. A French cook accused 
of being a spy was being flogged. The flogging 
was only just over, and the executioner was re- 
leasing from the flogging bench a stout man 
with red whiskers, in blue stockings and a 
green jacket, who was moaning piteously. An- 



other criminal, thin and pale, stood near. Judg- 
ing by their faces they were both Frenchmen. 
With a frightened and suffering look resem- 
bling that on the thin Frenchman's face, Pierre 
pushed his way in through the crowd. 

"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he 
kept asking. 

But the attention of the crowd officials, 
burghers, shopkeepers, peasants, and women 
in cloaks and in pelisses was so eagerly cen- 
tered on what was passing in L6bnoe Place that 
no one answered him. The stout man rose, 
frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently 
trying to appear firm began to pull on his jack- 
et without looking about him, but suddenly his 
lips trembled and he began to cry, in the way 
full-blooded grown-up men cry, though angry 
with himself for doing so. In the crowd peo- 
ple began talking loudly, to stifle their feelings 
of pity as it seemed to Pierre. 

"He's cook to some prince." 

"Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be 
sour to a Frenchman . . . sets his teeth on edgel" 
said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind 
Pierre, when the Frenchman began to cry. 

The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping 
that his joke would be appreciated. Some peo- 
ple began to laugh, others continued to watch 
in dismay the executioner who was undressing 
the other man. 

Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he 
turned hastily away, went back to his trap mut- 
tering something to himself as he went, and 
took his seat. As they drove along he shuddered 
and exclaimed several times so audibly that the 
coachman asked him: 

"What is your pleasure?" 

"Where are you going?" shouted Pierre to 
the man, who was driving to Lubyanka Street. 

"To the Governor's, as you ordered," an- 
swered the coachman. 

"Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing his 
coachman a thing he rarely did. "Home, I told 
you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I must get 
away this very day," he murmured to himself. 

At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and 
the crowd surrounding the L6bnoe Place, 
Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that 
he could no longer remain in Moscow and 
would leave for the army that very day that it 
seemed to him that either he had told the 
coachman this or that the man ought to have 
known it for himself. 

On reaching .home Pierre gave orders to 
Evstfey his head coachman who knew every- 
thing, could do anything, and was known to all 



430 

Moscow that he would leave that night for 
the army at Mozhdysk, and that his saddle 
horses should be sent there. This could not all 
be arranged that day, so on Evstdfey's represen- 
tation Pierre had to put off his departure till 
next day to allow time for the relay horses to 
be sent on in advance. 

On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared 
up after a spell of rain, and after dinner Pierre 
left Moscow. When changing horses that night 
in Perkhushkovo, he learned that there had 
been a great battle that evening. (This was the 
battle of Shevdrdino.) He was told that there 
in Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the 
firing, but nobody could answer his questions 
as to who had won. At dawn next day Pierre 
was approaching Mozhdysk. 

Every house in Mozhdysk had soldiers quar- 
tered in it, and at the hostel where Pierre was 
met by his groom and coachman there was no 
room to be had. It was full of officers. 

Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, 
troops were stationed or on the march. Cos- 
sacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, 
and cannon were everywhere. Pierre pushed 
forward as fast as he could, and the further he 
left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged 
into that sea of troops the more was he over- 
come by restless agitation and a new and joy- 
ful feeling he had not experienced before. It 
was a feeling akin to what he had felr at the 
Slob6da Palace during the Emperor's visita 
sense of the necessity of undertaking some- 
thing and sacrificing something. lie now ex- 
perienced a glad consciousness that everything 
that constitutes men's happiness the comforts 
of life, wealth, even life itself is rubbish it is 
pleasant to throw away, compared with some- 
thing . . . With what? Pierre could not say, and 
he did not try to determine for whom and for 
what he felt such particular delight in sacrific- 
ing everything. He was not occupied with the 
question of what to sacrifice for; the fact of 
sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and joy- 
ous sensation. 

CHAPTER XIX 

ON THE TWENTY-FOURTH OF AUGUST the battle 
of the Shevdrdino Redoubt was fought, on the 
twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side, 
and on the twenty-sixth the battle of Borodin6 
itself took place. 

Why and how were the battles of Shevdrdino 
and Borodin6 given and accepted? Why was 
the battle of Borodin6 fought? There was not 
the least sense in it for either the French or 



WAR AND PEACE 

the Russians. Its immediate result for the Rus- 
sians was, and wa^ bound to be, that we were 
brought nearer to the destruction of Moscow 
which we feared more than anything in the 
world; and for the French its immediate re- 
sult was that they were brought nearer to the 
destruction of their whole army which they 
feared more than anything in the world. What 
the result must be was quite obvious, and yet 
Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that 
battle. 

If the commanders had been guided by rea- 
son, it would seem that it must have been ob- 
vious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen 
hundred miles and giving battle with a prob- 
ability of losing a quarter of his army, he was 
advancing to certain destruction, and it must 
have been equally clear to Kutiizov that by ac- 
cepting battle and risking the loss of a quarter 
of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. 
For Kutuzov this was mathematically clear, as 
it is that if when playing draughts I have one 
man less and go on exchanging, I shall certainly 
lose, and therefore should not exchange. When 
my opponent has sixteen men and I have four- 
teen, I am only one eighth weaker than he, but 
when I have exchanged thirteen more men he 
will be three times as strong as I am. 

Before the battle of Borodin6 our strength 
in proportion to the French was about as five 
to six, but after that battle it was little more 
than one to two: previously we had a hundred 
thousand against a hundred and twenty thou- 
sand; afterwards little more than fifty thousand 
against a hundred thousand. Yet the shrewd and 
experienced Kutuzov accepted the battle, 
while Napoleon, who was said to be a com- 
mander of genius, gave it, losing a quarter of 
his army and lengthening his lines of commu- 
nication still more. If it is said that he expected 
to end the campaign by occupying Moscow as 
he had ended a previous campaign by occupy- 
ing Vienna, there is much evidence to the con- 
trary. Napoleon's historians themselves tell us 
that from Smolensk onwards he wished to stop, 
knew the danger of his extended position, 
and knew that the occupation of Moscow would 
not be the end of the campaign, for he had seen 
at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns 
were left to him, and had not received a single 
reply to his repeated announcements of his 
wish to negotiate. 

In giving and accepting battle at Borodin6, 
Kutuzov acted involuntarily and irrationally. 
But later on, to fit what had occurred, the his- 
torians provided cunningly devised evidence 



of the foresight and genius of the generals, who 
of all the blind tools of history were the most 
enslaved and involuntary. 

The ancients have left us model heroic po- 
ems in which the heroes furnish the whole in- 
terest of the story, and we are still unable to 
accustom ourselves to the fact that for our ep- 
och histories of that kind are meaningless. 

On the other question, how the battle of 
Borodin6 and the preceding battle of Shevdr- 
dino were fought, there also exists a definite 
and well-known, but quite false, conception. 
All the historians describe the affair as follows: 

The Russian army, they say, in its retreat 
from Smolensk sought out for itself the best 
position for a general engagement and found 
such a position at Borodind. 

The Russians, they say, fortified this posi- 
tion in advance on the left of the highroad 
(from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a 
right angle to it, from Borodind to Utitsa, at 
the very place where the battle was fought. 

In front of this position, they say, a fortified 
outpost was set up on the Shevdrdino mound 
to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, 
we are told, Napoleon attacked this advanced 
post and took it, and, on the twenty-sixth, at- 
tacked the whole Russian army, which was in 
position on the field of Borodino. 

So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, 
as anyone who cares to look into the matter 
can easily convince himself. 

The Russians did not seek out the best po- 
sition but, on the contrary, during the retreat 
passed many positions better than Borodin6. 
They did not stop at any one of these positions 
because Kutuzov did not wish to occupy a po- 
sition he had not himself chosen, because the 
popular demand for a battle had not yet ex- 
pressed itself strongly enough, and because 
Milorddovich had not yet arrived with the mi- 
litia, and for many other reasons. The fact is 
that other positions they had passed were 
stronger, and that the position at Borodin6 
(the one where the battle was fought), far from 
being strong, was no more a position than any 
other spot one might find in the Russian Em- 
pire by sticking a pin into the map at hazard. 

Not only did the Russians not fortify the po- 
sition on the field of Borodin6 to the left of, 
and at a right angle to, the highroad (that is, 
the position on which the battle took place), 
but never till the twenty-fifth of August, 1812, 
did they think that a battle might be fought 
there. This was shown first by the fact that 
there were no entrenchments there by the 



BOOK TEN 431 

twenty-fifth, and that those begun on the 



twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not complet- 
ed, and secondly, by the position of the Shevar- 
dino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite sense- 
less in front of the position where the battle 
was accepted. Why was it more strongly forti- 
fied than any other post? And why were all ef- 
forts exhausted and six thousand men sacri- 
ficed to defend it till late at night on the 
twenty-fourth? A Cossack patrol would have 
sufficed to observe the enemy. Thirdly, as proof 
that the position on which the battle was 
fought had not been foreseen and that the 
Shevdrdino Redoubt was not an advanced post 
of that position, we have the fact that up to the 
twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagrati6n 
were convinced that the Shevdrdino Redoubt 
was the left flank of the position, and that Ku- 
tuzov himself in his report, written in hot haste 
after the battle, speaks of the Shevdrdino Re- 
doubt as the left flank of the position. It was 
much later, when reports on the battle of Bor- 
odin6 were written at leisure, that the incorrect 
and extraordinary statement was invented 
(probably to justify the mistakes of a com- 
mander in chief who had to be represented as 
infallible) that the Shevdrdino Redoubt was an 
advanced post whereas in reality it was sim- 
ply a fortified point on the left flank and that 
the battle of Borodino was fought by us on an 
entrenched position previously selected, where- 
as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot 
which was almost unentrenched. 

The case was evidently this: a position was 
selected along the river Kolochd which crosses 
the highroad not at a right angle but at an 
acute angle so that the left flank was at She- 
vdrdino, the right flank near the village of N6- 
voe, and the center at Boroclin6 at the conflu- 
ence of the rivers Kolochd and Voyna. 

To anyone who looks at the field of Boro- 
dino without thinking of how the battle was 
actually fought, this position, protected by the 
river Kolochd, presents itself as obvious for an 
army whose object was to prevent an enemy 
from advancing along the Smolensk road to 
Moscow. 

Napoleon, riding to Value"vo on the twenty- 
fourth, did not see (as the history books say he 
did) the position of the Russians from Utftsa 
to Borodin6 (he could not have seen that po- 
sition because it did not exist), nor did he see 
an advanced post of the Russian army, but 
while pursuing the Russian rearguard he came 
upon the left flank of the Russian position at 
the Shevdrdino Redoubt and unexpectedly 



432 



WAR AND PEACE 



for the Russians moved his army across the Ko- 
lochd. And the Russians, not having time to 
begin a general engagement, withdrew their 
left wing from the position they had intended 
to occupy and took up a new position which 
had not been foreseen andwas not fortified. By 
crossing to the other side of the Kolochd to the 
left of the highroad, Napoleon shifted the 
whole forthcoming battle from right to left 
(looking from the Russian side) and trans- 
ferred it to the plain between Utitsa, Seme- 
novsk, and Borodino a plain no more advan- 
tageous as a position than any other plain in 
Russia and there the whole battle of the 
twenty-sixth of August took place. [See the 
rough outline of the plan of the intended bat- 
tle and of the battle that actually took place.] 

Had Napoleon not ridden out on the eve- 
ning of the twenty-fourth to the Kolochd, and 
had he not then ordered an immediate attack 
on the redoubt but had begun the attack next 
morning, no one would have doubted that the 
Shevdrdino Redoubt was the left flank of our 
position, and the battlewould have taken place 
where we expected it. In that case we should 
probably have defended the Shevdrdino Re- 
doubtour left flank still more obstinately. 
We should have attacked Napoleon in the 
center or on the right, and the engagement 
would have taken place on the twenty- filth, in 
the position we intended and had fortified. But 
as the attack on our left flank took place in the 
evening after the retreat of our rearguard (that 
is, immediately after the fight at Gridneva), 
and as the Russian commanders did not wish, 
or were not in time, to begin a general engage- 
ment then on theeveningof the twenty-fourth, 
the first and chief action of the battle of Boro- 
dino was already lost on the twenty-fourth, 
and obviously led to the loss of the one fought 
on the twenty-sixth. 

After the loss of the Shevdrdino Redoubt, we 
found ourselves on the morning of the twenty- 
fifth without a position for our left flank, and 
were forced to bend it back and hastily en- 
trench it where it chanced to be. 

Notonlywas the Russian army on the twenty- 
sixth defended by weak, unfinished entrench- 
ments, but the disadvantage of that position 
was increased by the fact that the Russian com- 
mandersnot having fully realized what had 
happened, namely the loss of our position on 
the left flank and the shifting of the whole field 
of the forthcoming battle from right to left- 
maintained their extended position from the 
village of N6voe to Utftsa, and consequently 



had to move their forces from right to left dur- 
ing the battle. So it happened that throughout 
the whole battle the Russians opposed the en- 
tire French army launched against our left 
flank with but half as many men. (Poniatow- 
ski's action against Utftsa, and Uvdrov's on the 
right flank against the French, were actions 
distinct from the main course of the battle.) 
So the battle of Borodin6 did not take place at 
all as (in an effort to conceal our commanders' 
mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the 
glory due to the Russian army and people) it 
has been described. The battle of BorodimS 
was not fought on a chosen and entrenched 
position with forces only slightly weaker than 
those of the enemy, but, as a result of the 
loss of the Shevdrdino Redoubt, the Russians 
fought the battle of Borodin6 on an open and 
almost unentrenched position, with forces on- 
ly half as numerous as the French; that is to 
say, under conditions in which it was not mere- 
ly unthinkable to fight for ten hours and se- 
cure an indecisive result, but unthinkable to 
keep an army even from complete disintegra- 
tion and flight. 

CHAPTER XX 

ON THE MORNING of the twenty-fifth Pierre was 
leaving Mozhdysk. At the descent of the high 
steep hill, down which a winding road led out 
of the town past the cathedral on the right, 
where a service was being held and the bells 
were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehicle and 
proceeded on foot. Behind him a cavalry regi- 
ment was coming down the hill preceded by its 
singers. Coming up toward him was a train of 
carts carrying men who had been wounded in 
the engagement the day before. The peasant 
drivers, shouting and lashing their horses, kept 
crossing from side to side. The carts, in each of 
which three or four wounded soldiers were ly- 
ing or sitting, jolted over the stones that had 
been thrown on the steep incline to make it 
something like a road. The wounded, band- 
aged with rags, with pale cheeks, compressed 
lips, and knitted brows, held on to the sides of 
the carts as they were jolted against one anoth- 
er. Almost all of them stared with naive, child- 
like curiosity at Pierre's white hat and green 
swallow-tail coat. 

Pierre's coachman shouted angrily at the 
convoy of wounded to keep to one side of the 
road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the 
hill with its singers, surrounded Pierre's car- 
riage and blocked the road. Pierre stopped, 
being pressed against the side of the cutting in 



BOOK TEN 



433 



which the road ran. The sunshine from behind 
the hill did not penetrate into the cutting and 
there it was cold and damp, but above Pierre's 
head was the bright August sunshine and the 
bells sounded merrily. One of the carts with 
wounded stopped by the side of the road close 
to Pierre. The driver in his bast shoes ran pant- 
ing up to it, placed a stone under one of its 
tireless hind wheels, and began arranging the 
breech-band on his little horse. 

One of the wounded, an old soldier with a 
bandaged arm who was following the cart on 
foot, caught hold of it with his sound hand and 
turned to look at Pierre. 

"I say, fellow countryman I Will they set us 
down here or take us on to Moscow?" h asked. 

Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not 
hear the question. He was looking now at the 
cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of 
wounded, now at the cart by which he was 
standing, in which two wounded men were 
sitting and one was lying. One of those sitting 
up in the cart had probably been wounded in 
the cheek. His whole head was wrapped in 
rags and one check was swollen to the size of a 
baby's head. His nose and mouth were twisted 
to one side. This soldier was looking at the 
cathedral and crossing himself. Another, a 
young lad, a fair-haired recruit as white as 
though there was no blood in his thin face, 
looked at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. 
The third lay prone so that his face was not 
visible. The cavalry singers were passing close 
by: 

Ah lost, quite lost . . . is my head so keen, 
Living in a foreign land . . . 

they sang their soldiers' dance song. 

As if responding to them but with a different 
sort of merriment, the metallic sound of the 
bells reverberated high above and the hot rays 
of the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope 
with yet another sort of merriment. But be- 
neath the slope, by the cart with the wounded 
near the panting little nag where Pierre stood, 
it was damp, somber, and sad. 

The soldier with the swollen cheek looked 
angrily at the cavalry singers. 

"Oh, the coxcombs 1" he muttered reproach- 
fully. 

"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peas- 
ants today, too. . . . The peasants even they 
have to go," said the soldier behind the cart, 
addressing Pierre with a sad smile. "No dis- 
tinctions made nowadays. . . . They want the 
whole nation to fall on them in a word, it's 
Moscow! They want to make an end of it." 



In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's 
words Pierre understood what he wanted to say 
and nodded approval. 

The road was clear again; Pierre descended 
the hill and drove on. 

He kept looking to either side of the road 
for familiar faces, but only saw everywhere the 
unfamiliar faces of various military men of 
different branches of the service, who all 
looked with astonishment at his white hat and 
green tail coat. 

Having gone nearly three miles he at last 
met an acquaintance and eagerly addressed 
him. This was one of the head army doctors. 
He was driving toward Pierre in a covered gig, 
sitting beside a young surgeon, and on recog- 
nizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied 
the driver's seat to pull up. 

"Count! Your excellency, how come you to 
be here?" asked the doctor. 

"Well, you know, I wanted to see . . ." 

"Yes, yes, there will be something to see " 

Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, ex- 
plaining his intention of taking part in a bat- 
tle. 

The doctor advised him to apply direct to 
Kutiizov. 

"Why should you be God knows where out 
of sight, during the battle?" he said, exchang- 
ing glances with his young companion. "Any- 
how his Serene Highness knows you and will 
receive you graciously. That's what you must 
do." 

The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry. 

"You think so? ... Ah, I also wanted to ask 
you where our position is exactly?" said Pierre. 

"The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, 
that's not my line. Drive past Tatdrinova, a 
lot of digging is going on there. Go up the hill- 
ock and you'll see." 

"Can one see from there? ... If you would 

But the doctor interrupted him and moved 
toward his gig. 

"I would go with you but on my honor I'm 
up to here" and he pointed to his throat. "I'm 
galloping to the commander of the corps. How 
do matters stand? . . . You know, Count, there'll 
be a battle tomorrow. Out of an army of a hun- 
dred thousand we must expect at least twenty 
thousand wounded, and we haven't stretchers, 
or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enough for six 
thousand. We have ten thousand carts, but we 
need other things as well we must manage as 
best we can!" 

The strange thought that of the thousands 



434 



WAR AND PEACE 



of men, young and old, who had stared with 
merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very 
men he had noticed), twenty thousand were 
inevitably doomed to wounds and death amazed 
Pierre. 

"They may die tomorrow; why are they 
thinking of anything but death?" And by some 
latent sequence of thought the descent of the 
Mozhdysk hill, the carts with the wounded, the 
ringing bells, the slanting rays of the sun, and 
the songs of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to 
his mind. 

"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the 
wounded and do not for a moment think of 
what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the 
wounded. Yet from among these men twenty 
thousand are doomed to die, and they wonder 
at my hat! Strange!" thought Pierre, continu- 
ing his way to Tatarinova. 

In front of a landowner's house to the left of 
the road stood carriages, wagons, and crowds 
of orderlies and sentinels. The commander in 
chief was putting up there, but just when 
Pierre arrived he was not in and hardly any of 
the staff were therethey had gone to the 
church service. Pierre drove on toward G6rki. 

When he had ascended the hill and reached 
the little village street, he saw for the first time 
peasant militiamen in their white shirts and 
with crosses on their caps, who, talking and 
laughing loudly, animated and perspiring, 
were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with 
grass to the right of the road. 

Some of them were digging, others were 
wheeling barrowloads of earth along planks, 
while others stood about doing nothing. 

Two officers were standing on the knoll, di- 
recting the men. On seeing these peasants, who 
were evidently still amused by the novelty of 
their position as soldiers, Pierre once more 
thought of the wounded men at Mozhdysk and 
understood what the soldier had meant when 
he said: "They want the whole nation to fall 
on them." The sight of these bearded peasants 
at work on the battlefield, with their queer, 
clumsy boots and perspiring necks, and their 
shirts opening from the left toward the middle, 
unfastened, exposing their sunburned collar- 
bones, impressed Pierre more strongly with the 
solemnity and importance of the moment than 
anything he had yet seen or heard. 



CHAPTER XXI 

PIERRE STEPPED OUT of his carriage and, pass- 
ing the toiling militiamen, ascended the 
knoll from which, according to the doctor, 



the battlefield could be seen. 

It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone 
somewhat to the left and behind him and 
brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, 
rising like an amphitheater, extended before 
him in the clear rarefied atmosphere. 

From above on the left, bisecting that am- 
phitheater, wound the Smolensk highroad, 
passing through a village with a white church 
some five hundred paces in front of the knoll 
and below it. This was Borodin6. Below the 
village the road crossed the river by a bridge 
and, winding down and up, rose higher and 
higher to the village of Valiievo visible about 
four miles away, where Napoleon was then sta- 
tioned. Beyond Valiievo the road disappeared 
into a yellowing forest on the horizon. Far in 
the distance in that birch and fir forest to the 
right of the road, the cross and belfry of the 
Kolochd Monastery gleamed in the sun. Here 
and there over the whole of that blue expanse, 
to right and left of the forest and the road, 
smoking campfires could be seen and indefinite 
masses of troops ours and the enemy's. The 
ground to the right along the course of the 
Kolochd and Moskvd rivers was broken and 
hilly. Between the hollows the villages of Bez- 
ziibova and Zakhdrino showed in the distance. 
On the left the ground was more level; there 
were fields of grain, and the smoking ruins of 
Semenovsk, which had been burned down, 
could be seen. 

All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that 
neither the left nor the right side of the field 
fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere could 
he see the battlefield he had expected to find, 
but only fields, meadows, troops, woods, the 
smoke of campfires, villages, mounds, and 
streams; and try as he would he could descry 
no military "position" in this place which 
teemed with life, nor could he even distinguish 
our troops from the enemy's. 

"I must ask someone who knows," bethought, 
and addressed an officer who was looking with 
curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure. 

"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village 
that is in front?" 

"Biirdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning 
to his companion. 

"Borodin6," the other corrected him. 

The officer, evidently glad of an opportu- 
nity for a talk, moved up to Pierre. 

"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired. 

"Yes, and there, further on, are the French," 
said the officer. "There they are, there . . . you 
can see them." 



BOOK TEN 



435 



"Where? Where?" asked Pierre. 

"One can see them with the naked eye. . . . 
Why, therel" 

The officer pointed with his hand to the 
smoke visible on the left beyond the river, and 
the same stern and serious expression that 
Pierre had noticed on many of the faces he had 
met came into his face. 

"Ah, so those are the French! And over there? 
. . ." Pierre pointed to a knoll on the left, near 
which some troops could be seen. 

"Those are ours." 

"Ah, ours I And there? . . ." Pierre pointed to 
another knoll in the distance with a big tree on 
it, near a village that lay in a hollow where also 
some campfires were smoking and something 
black was visible. 

"That's his again," said the officer. (It was 
the Shevdrdino Redoubt.) "It was ours yester- 
day, but now it is his" 

"Then how about our position?" 

"Our position?" replied the officer with a 
smile of satisfaction. "I can tell you quite clear- 
ly, because I constructed nearly all our en- 
trenchments. There, you see? There's our cen- 
ter, at Borodin6, just there," and he pointed to 
the village in front of them with the white 
church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha. 
You see down there where the rows of hay are 
lying in the hollow, there's the bridge. That's 
our center. Our right flank is over there" he 
pointed sharply to the right, far away in the 
broken ground "That's where the Moskva 
River is, and we have thrown up three redoubts 
there, very strong ones. The left flank . . ." 
here the officer paused. "Well, you see, that's 
difficult to explain. . . . Yesterday our left flank 
was there at Shevdrdino, you see, where the 
oak is, but now we have withdrawn our left 
wing now it is over there, do you see that vil- 
lage and the smoke? That's Semenovsk, yes, 
there," he pointed to Ravski's knoll. "But the 
battle will hardly be there. His having moved 
his troops there is only a ruse; he will probably 
pass round to the right of the Moskva. But 
wherever it may be, many a man will be miss- 
ing tomorrow 1" he remarked. 

An elderly sergeant who had approached the 
officer while he was giving these explanations 
had waited in silence for him to finish speak- 
ing, but at this point, evidently not liking the 
officer's remark, interrupted him. 

"Gabions must be sent for," said he stern- 

iy- 

The officer appeared abashed, as though he 
understood that one might think of how many 



men would be missing tomorrow but ought not 
to speak of it. 

"Well, send number three company again," 
the officer replied hurriedly. 

"And you, are you one of the doctors?" 

"No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, 
and he went down the hill again, passing the 
militiamen. 

"Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the 
officer who followed him, holding his nose as 
he ran past the men at work. 

"There they are . . . bringing her, coming . . . 
There they are . . . They'll be here in a minute 
. . ." voices were suddenly heard saying; and 
officers, soldiers, and militiamen began run- 
ning forward along the road. 

A church procession was coming up the hill 
from Borodim'). First along the dusty road came 
the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and with 
arms reversed. From behind them came the 
sound of church singing. 

Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past 
Pierre toward the procession. 

"They are bringing her, our Protectress! . . . 
The Iberian Mother of God!" someone cried. 

"The Smolensk Mother of God," another 
corrected him. 

The militiamen, both those who had been 
in the village and those who had been at work 
on the battery, threw down their spades and 
ran to meet the church procession. Following 
the battalion that marched along the dusty 
road came priests in their vestments one little 
old man in a hood with attendants and singers. 
Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large, 
dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover. 
This was the icon that had been brought from 
Smolensk and had since accompanied the army. 
Behind, before, and on both sides, crowds of 
militiamen with bared heads walked, ran, and 
bowed to the ground. 

At the summit of the hill they stopped with 
the icon; the men who had been holding it up 
by the linen bands attached to it were relieved 
by others, the chanters relit their censers, and 
service began. The hot rays of the sun beat 
down vertically and a fresh soft wind played 
with the hair of the bared heads and with the 
ribbons decorating the icon. The singing did 
not sound loud under the open sky. An im- 
mense crowd of bareheaded officers, soldiers, 
and militiamen surrounded the icon. Behind 
the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities 
on a spot reserved for them. A bald general with 
a St. George's Cross on his neck stood just be- 
hind the priest's back, and without crossing 



436 



WAR AND PEACE 



himself (he was evidently a German) patiently 
awaited the end of the service, which he con- 
sidered it necessary to hear to the end, prob- 
ably to arouse the patriotism of the Russian 
people. Another general stood in a martial pose, 
crossing himself by shaking his hand in front 
of his chest while looking about him. Standing 
among the crowd of peasants, Pierre recognized 
several acquaintances among these notables, 
but did not look at them his whole attention 
was absorbed in watching the serious expression 
on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militia- 
men who were all gazing eagerly at the icon. 
As soon as the tired chanters, who were sing- 
ing the service for the twentieth time that day, 
began lazily and mechanically to sing: "Save 
from calamity Thy servants, O Motherof God," 
and the priest and deacon chimed in: "For to 
Thee under God we all flee as to an inviolable 
bulwark and protection," there again kindled 
in all those faces the same expression of con- 
sciousness of the solemnity of the impending 
moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at 
the foot of the hill at MozMysk and momen- 
tarily on many and many faces he had met that 
morning; and heads were bowed more fre- 
quently and hair tossed back, and sighs and the 
sound men made as they crossed themselves 
were heard. 

The crowd round the icon suddenly parted 
and pressed against Pierre. Someone, a very 
important personage judging by the haste with 
which way was made for him, was approaching 
the icon. 

It was Kutuzov, who had been riding round 
the position and on his way back to Tatdrino- 
va had stopped where the service was being 
held. Pierre recognized him at once by his pe- 
culiar figure, which distinguished him from ev- 
erybody else. 

With a longovercoat on his exceedingly stout, 
round-shouldered body, with uncovered white 
head and puffy face showing the white ball of 
the eye he had lost, Kutuzov walked with 
plunging, swaying gait into the crowd and 
stopped behind the priest. He crossed himself 
with an accustomed movement, bent till he 
touched the ground with his hand, and bowed 
his white head with a deep sigh. Behind Kutu- 
zov was Bennigsen and the suite. Despite the 
presence of the commander in chief, who at- 
tracted the attention of all the superior officers, 
the militiamen and soldiers continued their 
prayers without looking at him. 

When the service was over, Kutuzov stepped 
up to the icon, sank heavily to his knees, bowed 



to the ground, and for a long time tried vainly 
to rise, but could not do so on account of his 
weakness and weight. His white head twitched 
with the effort. At last he rose, kissed the icon 
as a child does with naively pouting lips, and 
again bowed till he touched the ground with 
his hand. The other generals followed his ex- 
ample, then the officers, and after them with 
excited faces, pressing on one another, crowd- 
ing, panting, and pushing, scrambled the sol- 
diers and militiamen. 

CHAPTER XXII 

STAGGERING amid the crush, Pierre looked about 
him. 

"Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you get 
here?" said a voice. 

Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetsk6y, 
brushing his knees with his hand (he had 
probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt 
before the icon), came up to him smiling. 
Boris was elegantly dressed, with a slightly 
martial touch appropriate to a campaign. He 
wore a long coat and like Kutuzov had a whip 
slung across his shoulder. 

Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village 
and seated himself in the shade of the nearest 
house, on a bench which one Cossack had run 
to fetch and another had hastily covered with a 
rug. An immense and brilliant suite surround- 
ed him. 

The icon was carried further, accompanied 
by the throng. Pierre stopped some thirty paces 
from Kutuzov, talking to Boris. 

He explained his wish to be present at the 
battle and to see the position. 

"This is what you must do," said Boris. "I 
will do the honors of the camp to you. You will 
see everything best from where Count Ben- 
nigsen will be. I am in attendance on him, you 
know; I'll mention it to him. But if you want 
to ride round the position, come along with us. 
We are just going to the left flank. Then when 
we get back, do spend the night with me and 
we'll arrange a game of cards. Of course you 
know Dmitri Serge'evich? Those are his quar- 
ters," and he pointed to the third house in the 
village of G6rki. 

"But I should like to see the right flank. 
They say it's very strong," said Pierre. "I should 
like to start from the Moskva River and ride 
round the whole position." 

"Well, you can do that later, but the chief 
thing is the left flank." 

"Yes, yes. But where is Prince Bolk6nski's 
regiment? Can you point it out to me?" 



BOOK TEN 



437 



"Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll 
take you to him." 

"What about the left flank?" asked Pierre. 

"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, 
God only knows what state our left flank is in," 
said Boris confidentially lowering his voice. 
"It is not at all what Count Bennigsen intend- 
ed. He meant to fortify that knoll quite differ- 
ently, but . . ." Boris shrugged his shoulders, 
"his Serene Highness would not have it, or 
someone persuaded him. You see . . ." but 
Boris did not finish, for at that moment Kaysa- 
rov, Kutuzov's adjutant, came up to Pierre. 
"Ah, Kaysarov!" said Boris, addressing him 
with an unembarrassed smile, "I was just try- 
ing to explain our position to the count. It is 
amazing how his Serene Highness could so fore- 
see the intentions of the French!" 

"You mean the left flank?" asked Kaysarov. 

"Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely 
strong." 

Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unneces- 
sary men from the staff, Boris had contrived to 
remain at headquarters after the changes. He 
had established himself with Count Bennigsen, 
who, like all on whom Boris had been in at- 
tendance, considered young Prince Drubet- 
sk6y an invaluable man. 

In the higher command there were two sharp- 
ly defined parties: Kutuzov's party and that of 
Bennigsen, the chief of staff. Boris belonged to 
the latter and no one else, while showing ser- 
vile respect to Kutuzov, could so create an im- 
pression that the old fellow was not much good 
and that Bennigsen managed everything. Now 
the decisive moment of battle had come when 
Kutuzov would be destroyed and the power 
pass to Bennigsen, or even if Kutuzov won the 
battle it would be felt that everything was 
done by Bennigsen. In any case many great re- 
wards would have to be given for tomorrow's 
action, and new men would come to the front. 
So Boris was full of nervous vivacity all day. 

After Kaysdrov, others whom Pierre knew 
came up to him, and he had not time to reply 
to all the questions about Moscow that were 
showered upon him, or to listen to all that was 
told him. The faces all expressed animation 
and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that 
the cause of the excitement shown in some of 
these faces lay chiefly in questions of personal 
success; his mind, however, was occupied by 
the different expression he saw on other faces 
an expression that spoke not of personal 
matters but of the universal questions of life 
and death. Kutuzov noticed Pierre's figure 



and the group gathered round him. 
"Call him to me," said Kutuzov. 
An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene High- 
ness' wish, and Pierre went toward Kutuzov's 
bench. But a militiaman got there before him. 
It was D61okhov. 

"How did that fellow get here?" asked 
Pierre. 

"He's a creature that wriggles in anywhere!" 
was the answer. "He has been degraded, you 
know. Now he wants to bob up again. He's 
been proposing some scheme or other and has 
crawled into the enemy's picket line at night. 
. . . He's a brave fellow." 

Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectful- 
ly to Kutuzov. 

"I concluded that if I reported to your Se- 
rene Highness you might send me away or say 
that you knew what I was reporting, but then 
I shouldn't lose anything . . ." D61okhov was 
saying. 

"Yes, yes." 

"But if I were right, I should be rendering 
a service to my Fatherland for which I am ready 
to die." 

"Yes, yes." 

"And should your Serene Highness require 
a man who will not spare his skin, please think 
of me. . . . Perhaps I may prove useful to your 
Serene Highness." 

"Yes . . . Yes ..." Kutuzov repeated, his 
laughing eye narrowing more and more as he 
looked at Pierre. 

Just then Boris, with his courtierlike adroit- 
ness, stepped up to Pierre's side near Kutuzov 
and in a most natural manner, without raising 
his voice, said to Pierre, as though continuing 
an interrupted conversation: 

"The militia have put on clean white shirts 
to be ready to die. What heroism, Count!" 

Boris evidently said this to Pierre in order 
to be overheard by his Serene Highness. He 
knew Kutuzov's attention would be caught by 
those words, and so it was. 

"What are you saying about the militia?" he 
asked Boris. 

"Preparing for tomorrow, your Serene High- 
nessfor death they have put on clean shirts." 

"Ah ... a wonderful, a matchless people!" 
said Kutuzov; and he closed his eyes and swayed 
his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated 
with a sigh. 

"So you want to smell gunpowder?" he said 
to Pierre. "Yes, it's a pleasant smell. I have the 
honor to be one of your wife's adorers. Is she 
well? My quarters are at your service." 



438 



WAR AND PEACE 



And as often happens with old people, Ku- 
tuzov began looking about absent-mindedly 
as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do. 

Then, evidently remembering what he want- 
ed, he beckoned to Andrew Kaysdrov, his ad- 
jutant's brother. 

"Those verses . . . those verses of M drin's . . . 
how do they go, eh? Those he wrote about Ger- 
dkov: 'Lectures for the corps inditing.' . . . Re- 
cite them, recite them!" said he, evidently pre- 
paring to laugh. 1 

Kaysdrov recited. . . . Kutiizov smilingly nod- 
ded his head to the rhythm of the verses. 

When Pierre had left Kutiizov, D61okhov 
came up to him and took his hand. 

"I am very glad to meet you here, Count/' 
he said aloud, regardless of the presence of 
strangers and in a particularly resolute and 
solemn tone. "On the eve of a day when God 
alone knows who of us is fated to survive, I am 
glad of this opportunity to tell you that I re- 
gret the misunderstandings that occurred be- 
tween us and should wish you not to have any 
ill feeling for me. I beg you to forgive me." 

Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not 
knowing what to say to him. With tears in his 
eyes D61okhov embraced Pierre and kissed him. 

Boris said a few words to his general, and 
Count Bennigsen turned to Pierre and pro- 
posed that he should ride with him along the 
line. 

"It will interest you," said he. 

"Yes, very much," replied Pierre. 

Half an hour later Kutiizov left for Tatdri- 
nova, and Bennigsen and his suite, with Pierre 
among them, set out on their ride along the 
line. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

FROM G6RKI, Bennigsen descended the high- 
road to the bridge which, when they had 
looked at it from the hill, the officer had pointed 
out as being the center of our position and 
where rows of fragrant new-mown hay lay by 
the riverside. They rode across that bridge into 
the village of Borodin6 and thence turned to 
the left, passing an enormous number of troops 

1 S. N. Marin, an aide-de-camp to Alexander I, 
was well known for his parodies and amusing 
verses. G. V. Gerdkov was a captain in the army, a 
teacher in the military school, and the author of 
numerous patriotic works of very poor quality. 
M drin's verse about him was: 

You will always go on writing 
And to death your readers bore: 
Lectures for the corps inditing 
Be a captain evermore. 

-TR. 



and guns, and came to a high knoll where mi- 
litiamen were digging. This was the redoubt, 
as yet unnamed, which afterwards became 
known as the Ratfvski Redoubt, or the Knoll 
Battery, but Pierre paid no special attention 
to it. He did not know that it would become 
more memorable to him than any other spot 
on the plain of Borodin6. 

They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, 
where the soldiers were dragging away the last 
logs from the huts and barns. Then they rode 
downhill and uphill, across a rycfield trodden 
and beaten down as if by hail, following a 
track freshly made by the artillery over the fur- 
rows of the plowed land, and reached some 
fleches a which were still being dug. 

At the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began 
looking at the Shevdrdino Redoubt opposite, 
which had been ours the day before and where 
several horsemen could be descried. The offi- 
cers said that either Napoleon or Murat was 
there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little 
group of horsemen. Pierre also looked at them, 
trying to guess which of the scarcely discernible 
figures was Napoleon. At last those mounted 
men rode away from the mound and disap- 
peared. 

Bennigsen spoke to a general who ap- 
proached him, and began explaining the whole 
position of our troops. Pierre listened to him, 
straining each faculty to understand the es- 
sential points of the impending battle, but was 
mortified to feel that his mental capacity was 
inadequate for the task. He could make noth- 
ing of it. Bennigsen stopped speaking and, 
noticing that Pierre was listening, suddenly 
said to him: 

"I don't think this interests you?" 

"On the contrary it's very interesting!" re- 
plied Pierre not quite truthfully. 

From the fleches they rode still farther to the 
left, along a road winding through a thick, 
low-growing birch wood. In the middle of the 
wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out 
and, scared by the tramp of the many horses, 
grew so confused that it leaped along the road 
in front of them for some time, arousing gen- 
eral attention and laughter, and only when sev- 
eral voices shouted at it did it dart to one side 
and disappear in the thicket. After going 
through the wood for about a mile and a half 
they came out on a glade where troops of Tiich- 
kov's corps were stationed to defend the left 
flank. 

Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennigsen 

3 A kind of entrenchment.-L. TOLSTOY 



talked a great deal and with much heat, and, 
as it seemed to Pierre, gave orders of great mil- 
itary importance. In front of Tuchkov's troops 
was some high ground not occupied by troops. 
Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake, say- 
ing that it was madness to leave a height which 
commanded the country around unoccupied 
and to place troops below it. Some of the gen- 
erals expressed the same opinion. One in par- 
ticular declared with martial heat that they 
were put there to be slaughtered. Bennigsen on 
his own authority ordered the troops to occu- 
py the high ground. This disposition on the 
left flank increased Pierre's doubt of his own 
capacity to understand military matters. Lis- 
tening to Bennigsen and the generals criticiz- 
ing the position of the troops behind the hill, 
he quite understood them and shared their 
opinion, but for that very reason he could not 
understand how the man who put them there 
behind the hill could have made so gross and 
palpable a blunder. 

Pierre did not know that these troops were 
not, as Bennigsen supposed, put there to de- 
fend the position, but were in a concealed po- 
sition as an ambush, that they should not be 
seen and might be able to strike an approaching 
enemy unexpectedly. Bennigsen did not know 
this and moved the troops forward according 
to his own ideas without mentioning the mat- 
ter to the commander in chief. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

ON THAT BRIGHT EVENING of AugUSt 25, PrinCC 

Andrew lay leaning on his elbow in a broken- 
down shed in the village of Knyazk6vo at the 
further end of his regiment's encampment. 
Through a gap in the broken wall he could 
see, beside the wooden fence, a row of thirty- 
year-old birches with their lower branches 
lopped off, a field on which shocks of oats were 
standing, and some bushes near which rose the 
smoke of campfires the soldiers' kitchens. 

Narrow and burdensome and useless to any- 
one as his life now seemed to him, Prince An- 
drew on the eve of battle felt agitated and ir- 
ritable as he had done seven years before at 
Austerlitz. 

He had received and given the orders for 
next day's battle and had nothing more to do. 
But his thoughts the simplest, clearest,- and 
therefore most terrible thoughts would give 
him no peace. He knew that tomorrow's battle 
would be the most terrible of all he had taken 
part in, and for the first time in his life the pos- 
sibility of death presented itself to him not 



BOOK TEN 439 

in relation to any worldly matter or with ref- 



erence to its effect on others, but simply in re- 
lation to himself, to his own soul vividly, 
plainly, terribly, and almost as a certainty. And 
from the height of this perception all that had 
previously tormented and preoccupied him 
suddenly became illumined by a cold white 
light without shadows, without perspective, and 
without distinction of outline. All life appeared 
to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he 
had long been gazing by artificial light through 
a glass. Now he suddenly saw those badly daubed 
pictures in clear daylight and without a glass. 
"Yes, yes! There they are, those false images 
that agitated, enraptured, and tormented me," 
said he to himself, passing in review the princi- 
pal pictures of the magic lantern of life and 
regarding them now in the cold white daylight 
of his clear perception of death. "There they 
are, those rudely painted figures that once 
seemed splendid and mysterious. Glory, the 
good of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland 
itself how important these pictures appeared 
to me, with what profound meaning they 
seemed to be filled! And it is all so simple, pale, 
and crude in the cold white light of this morn- 
ing which I feel is dawning for me." The three 
great sorrows ot his life held his attention in 
particular: his love for a woman, his father's 
death, and the French invasion which had over- 
run half Russia. "Love! . . . that little girl who 
seemed tome brimmingover with mystic forces! 
Yes, indeed, 1 loved her. I made romantic plans 
of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a 
boy I was!" he said aloud bitterly. "Ah me! I 
believed in some ideal love which was to 
keep her faithful to me for the whole year of 
my absence! Like the gentle dove in the fable 
she was to pine apart from me. . . . But it was 
much simpler really. ... It was all very simple 
and horrible. 

"When my father built Bald Hills bethought 
the place was his: his land, his air, his peasants. 
But Napoleon came and swept him aside, un- 
conscious of his existence, as lie might brush a 
chip from his path, and his Bald Hills and his 
whole life fell to pieces. Princess Mary says it 
is a trial sent from above. What is the trial for, 
when he is not here and will never return? He 
is not here! For whom then is the trial intend- 
ed? The Fatherland, the destruction of Mos- 
cow! And tomorrow I shall be killed, perhaps 
not even by a Frenchman but by one of our 
own men, by a soldier discharging a musket 
close to my ear as one of them did yesterday, 
and the French will come and take me by head 



440 



WAR AND PEACE 



and heels and fling me into a hole that I may 
not stink under their noses, and new condi- 
tions of life will arise, which will seem quite 
ordinary to others and about which I shall 
know nothing. I shall not exist. . . ." 

He looked at the row of birches shining in 
the sunshine, with their motionless green and 
yellow foliage and white bark. "To die ... to 
be killed tomorrow . . . That I should not 
exist . . . That all this should still be, but no 
me. . . ." 

And the birches with their light and shade, 
the curly clouds, the smoke of the campfires, 
and all that was around him changed and 
seemed terrible and menacing. A cold shiver 
ran down his spine. lie rose quickly, went out 
of the shed, and began to walk about. 

After he had returned, voices were heard 
outside the shed. "Who's that?" he cried. 

The red-nosed Captain Timokhin, formerly 
D61okhov's squadron commander, but now 
from lack of officers a battalion commander, 
shyly entered the shed followed by an adju- 
tant and the regimental paymaster. 

Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the 
business they had come about, gave them some 
further instructions, and was about to dismiss 
them when he heard a familiar, lisping voice 
behind the shed. 

"Devil take it!" said the voice of a man 
stumbling over something. 

Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and 
saw Pierre, who had tripped over a pole on the 
ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. 
It was unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet 
people of his own set in general, and Pierre 
especially, for he reminded him of all the pain- 
ful moments of his last visit to Moscow. 

"You? What a surprise!" said he. "What 
brings you here? This is unexpected!" 

As he said this his eyes and face expressed 
more than coldness they expressed hostility, 
which Pierre noticed at once. He had ap- 
proached the shed full of animation, but on 
seeing Prince Andrew's face he felt constrained 
and ill at ease. 

"I have come . . . simply . . . you know . . . 
come ... it interests me," said Pierre, who had 
so often that day senselessly repeated thatword 
"interesting." "I wish to see the battle." 

"Oh yes, and what do the Masonic brothers 
say about war? How would they stop it?" said 
Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how's 
Moscow? And my people? Have they reached 
Moscow at last?" he asked seriously. 

"Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskaya told me 



so. I went to see them, but missed them. They 
have gone to your estate near Moscow/' 

CHAPTER XXV 

THE OFFICERS were about to take leave, but 
Prince Andrew, apparently reluctant to be left 
alone with his friend, asked them to stay and 
have tea. Seats were brought in and so was the 
tea. The officers gazed with surprise at Pierre's 
huge stout figure and listened to his talk of 
Moscow and the position of our army, round 
which he had ridden. Prince Andrew remained 
silent, and his expression was so forbidding 
that Pierre addressed his remarks chiefly to Ti- 
m6khin, the good-natured battalion com- 
mander. 

"So you understand the whole position of 
our troops?" Prince Andrew interrupted him. 

"Yes that is, how do you mean?" said Pierre. 
"Not being a military man I can't say I have 
understood it fully, but I understand the gen- 
eral position." 

"Well, then, you know more than anyone 
else, be it who it may," said Prince Andrew. 

"Oh!" said Pierre, looking over his spectacles 
in perplexity at Prince Andrew. "Well, and 
what do you think of Kutiizov's appointment?" 
he asked. 

"I was very glad of his appointment, that's 
all I know," replied Prince Andrew. 

"And tell me your opinion of Barclay de 
Tolly. In Moscow they are saying heaven knows 
what about him. . . . What do you think of 
him?" 

"Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicat- 
ing the officers. 

Pierre looked at Timokhin with the conde- 
scendingly interrogative smile with which ev- 
erybody involuntarily addressed that officer. 

"We see light again, since his Serenity has 
been appointed, your excellency," said Timo- 
khin timidly, and continually turning to glance 
at his colonel. 

"Why so?" asked Pierre. 

"Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, 
let me inform you. Why, when we were retreat- 
ing from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick 
or a wisp of hay or anything. You see, we were 
going away, so he would get it all; wasn't it so, 
your excellency?" and again Tim6khin turned 
to the prince. "But we daren't. In our regi- 
ment two officers were court-martialed for that 
kind of thing. But when his Serenity took com- 
mand every thing became straightforward. Now 
we see light. . . ." 

"Then why was it forbidden?" 



BOOK TEN 



441 



Tim6khin looked about in confusion, not 
knowing what or how to answer such a ques- 
tion. Pierre put the same question to Prince 
Andrew. 

"Why, so as not to lay waste the country we 
were abandoning to the enemy," said Prince 
Andrewwith venomous irony. "It is very sound: 
one can't permit the land to be pillaged and ac- 
custom the troops to marauding. At Smolensk 
too he judged correctly that the French might 
outflank us, as they had larger forces. But he 
could not understand this," cried Prince An- 
drew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape 
him involuntarily: "he could not understand 
that there, for the first time, we were fighting 
for Russian soil, and that there was a spirit in 
the men such as I had never seen before, that 
we had held the French for two days, and that 
that success had increased ourstrength tenfold. 
He ordered us to retreat, and all our efforts 
and losses went for nothing. He had no 
thought of betraying us, he tried to do the best 
he could, he thought out everything, and that 
is why he is unsuitable. He is unsuitable now, 
just because he plans out everything very thor- 
oughly and accurately as every German has to. 
How can I explain? . . . Well, say your father 
has a German valet, and he is a splendid valet 
and satisfies your father's requirements better 
than you could, then it's all right to let him 
serve. But if your father is mortally sick you'll 
send the valet away and attend to your father 
with your own un practiced, awkward hands, 
and will soothe him better than a skilled man 
who is a stranger could. So it has been with 
Barclay. While Russia was well, a foreigner 
could serve her and be a splendid minister; but 
as soon as she is in danger she needs one of her 
own kin. But in your Club they have been mak- 
ing him out a traitor! They slander him as a 
traitor, and the only result will be that after- 
wards, ashamed of their false accusations, they 
will make him out a hero or a genius instead of 
a traitor, and that will be still more unjust. He 
is an honest and very punctilious German." 

"And they say he's a skillful commander," 
rejoined Pierre. 

"I don't understand what is meant by 'a skill- 
ful commander/ "replied Prince Andrew iron- 
ically. 

"A skillful commander?" replied Pierre. 
"Why, one who foresees all contingencies . . . 
and foresees the adversary's intentions." 

"But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew 
as if it were a matter settled long ago. 

Pierre looked at him in surprise. 



"And yet they say that war is like a game of 
chess?" he remarked. 

"Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but with this 
little difference, that in chess you may think 
over each move as long as you please and are 
not limited for time, and with this difference 
too, that a knight is always stronger than a 
pawn, and two pawns are always stronger than 
one, while in war a battalion is sometimes 
stronger than a division and sometimes weaker 
than a company. The relative strength of 
bodies of troops can never be known to any- 
one. Believe me," he went on, "if things de- 
pended on arrangements made by the staff, I 
should be there making arrangements, but in- 
stead of that I have the honor to serve here in 
the regiment with these gentlemen, and I con- 
sider that on us tomorrow's battle will depend 
and not on those others. . . . Success never de- 
pends, and never will depend, on position, or 
equipment, or even on numbers, and least of 
all on position." 

"But on what then?" 

"On the feeling that is in me and in him," he 
pointed to Tim6khin, "and in each soldier." 

Prince Andrew glanced at Timokhin, who 
looked at his commander in alarm and bewil- 
derment. In contrast to his former reticent taci- 
turnity Prince Andrew now seemed excited. 
He could apparently not refrain from express- 
ing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred 
to him. 

"A battle is won by those who firmly resolve 
to win it! Why did we lose the battle at Auster- 
litz? The French losses were almost equal to 
ours, but very early we said to ourselves that we 
were losing the battle, and we did lose it. And 
we said so because we had nothing to fight for 
there, we wanted to get away from the battle- 
field as soon as we could. 'We've lost, so let us 
run,' and we ran. If we had not said that till 
the evening, heaven knows what might not 
have happened. But tomorrow we shan't say 
it! You talk about our position, the left flank 
weak and the right flank too extended," he 
went on. "That's all nonsense, there's nothing 
of the kind. But what awaits us tomorrow? A 
hundred million most diverse chances which 
will be decided on the instant by the fact that 
our men or theirs run or do not run, and that 
this man or that man is killed, but all that is 
being done at present is only play. The fact is 
that those men with whom you have ridden 
round the position not only do not help mat- 
ters, but hinder. They are only concerned with 
their own petty interests." 



44* 



WAR AND PEACE 



"At such a moment?" said Pierre reproach- 
fully. 

"At such a moment!" Prince Andrew re- 
peated. "To them it is only a moment afford- 
ing opportunities to undermine a rival and ob- 
tain an extra cross or ribbon. For me tomorrow 
means this: a Russian army of a hundred thou- 
sand and a French army of a hundred thousand 
have met to fight, and the thing is that these 
two hundred thousand men will fight and the 
side that fights more fiercely and spares itself 
least will win. And if you like I will tell you 
that whatever happens and whatever muddles 
those at the top may make, we shall win to- 
morrow's battle. Tomorrow, happen what may, 
we shall win!" 

"There now, your excellency! That's the 
truth, the real truth," said Tim6khin. "Who 
would spare himself now? The soldiers in my 
battalion, believe me, wouldn't drink their 
vodka! 'It's not the day for that!' they say." 

All were silent. The officers rose. Prince An- 
drew went out of the shed with them, giving 
final orders to the adjutant. After they had gone 
Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was 
about to start a conversation when they heard 
theclatter of three horses' hoof son the road not 
far from the shed, and looking in that direction 
Prince Andrew recognized Wolzogen and 
Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack. They 
rode close by continuing to converse, and 
Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these 
words: 

"Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. 
Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug Preis ge- 
ben" l said one of them. 

"Oh, ja" said the other, "der Zweck ist nur 
den Feind zu schwtichen, so kann man gewiss 
nicht den Verlust der Priv at-Personen in Ach- 
tung nehmen." * 

"Oh, no," agreed the other. 

"Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with 
an angry snort, when they had ridden past. 
"In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sis- 
ter, at Bald Hills. That's all the same to him! 
That's what I was saying to youthose German 
gentlemen won't win the battle tomorrow but 
will only make all the mess they can, because 
they have nothing in their German heads but 
theories not worth an empty eggshell and 
haven't in their hearts the one thing needed to- 

1&lt;4 The war must be extended widely. I cannot 
sufficiently commend that view." 

* "Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, 
so of course one cannot take into account the loss 
of private individuals." 



morrow that which Timokhin has. They have 
yielded up all Europe to him f and have now 
come to teach us. Fine teachers!" and again his 
voice grew shrill. 

"So you think we shall win tomorrow's bat- 
tle?" asked Pierre. 

"Yes, yes," answered Prince Andrew absent- 
ly. "One thing I would do if I had the power," 
he began again, "I would not take prisoners. 
Why take prisoners? It's chivalry! The French 
have destroyed my home and are on their way 
to destroy Moscow, they have outraged and are 
outraging me every moment. They are my ene- 
mies. In my opinion they are all criminals. And 
so thinks Timokhin and the whole army. They 
should be executed! Since they are my foes they 
cannot be my friends, whatever may have been 
said at Tilsit." 

"Yes, yes," muttered Pierre, looking with 
shining eyes at Prince Andrew. "I quite agree 
with you!" 

The question that had perturbed Pierre on 
the Mozhdysk hill and all that day now seemed 
to him quite clear and completely solved. He 
now understood the whole meaning and im- 
portance of this war and of the impending bat- 
tle. All he had seen that day, all the significant 
and stern expressions on the faces he had seen 
in passing, were lit up for him by a new light. 
He understood that latent heat (as they say 
in physics) of patriotism which was present in 
all these men he had seen, and this explained 
to him why they all prepared for death calmly, 
and as it were lightheartedly. 

"Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew con- 
tinued: "That by itself would quite change the 
whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we 
have played at war that's what's vile! We play 
at magnanimity and all that stuff. Such magna- 
nimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity 
and sensibility of a lady who faints when she 
sees a calf being killed: she is so kind-hearted 
that she can't look at blood, but enjoys eat- 
ing the calf served up with sauce. They talk to 
us of the rules of war, of chivalry, of flags of 
truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on. 
It's all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce 
in 1805; they humbugged us and we hum- 
bugged them. They plunder other people's 
houses, issue false paper money, and worst of all 
they kill my children and my father, and then 
talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes! 
Take no prisoners, but kill and be killed! He 
who has come to this as I have through the 
same sufferings ..." 

Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all 



BOOK TEN 



443 



the same to him whether or not Moscow was 
taken as Smolensk had been, was suddenly 
checked in his speech by an unexpected cramp 
in his throat. He paced up and down a few 
times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverish- 
ly and his lips quivered as he began speaking. 

"If there was none of this magnanimity in 
war, we should go to war only when it was 
worth while going to certain death, as now. 
Then there would not be war because Paul 
Ivdnovich had offended Michael Ivnovich. 
And when there was a war, like this one, it 
would be warl And then the detennination of 
the troops would be quite different. Then all 
these Westphalians and Hessians whom Na- 
poleon is leading would not follow him into 
Russia, and we should not go to fight in Aus- 
tria and Prussia without knowing why. War 
is not courtesy but the most horrible thing in 
life; and we ought to understand that and not 
play at war. We ought to accept this terrible 
necessity sternly and seriously. It all lies in 
that: get rid of falsehood and let war be war 
and not a game. As it is now, war is the favor- 
ite pastime of the idle and frivolous. The mili- 
tary calling is the most highly honored. 

"But what is war? What is needed for suc- 
cess in warfare? What are the habits of the 
military? The aim of war is murder; the meth- 
ods of war are spying, treachery, and their en- 
couragement, the ruin of a country's inhabit- 
ants, robbing them or stealing to provision the 
army, and fraud and falsehood termed mili- 
tary craft. The habits of the military class are 
the absence of freedom, that is, discipline, idle- 
ness, ignorance, cruelty, debauchery, and 
drunkenness. And in spite of all this it is the 
highest class, respected by everyone. All the 
kings, except the Chinese, wear military uni- 
forms, and he who kills most people receives 
the highest rewards. 

"They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to 
murder one another; they kill and maim tens 
of thousands, and then have thanksgiving serv- 
ices for having killed so many people (they 
even exaggerate the number), and they an- 
nounce a victory, supposing that the more peo- 
ple they have killed the greater their achieve- 
ment. How does God above look at them and 
hear them?" exclaimed Prince Andrew in a 
shrill, piercing voice. "Ah, my friend, it has of 
late become hard for me to live. I see that I 
have begun to understand too much. And it 
doesn't do for man to taste of the tree of knowl- 
edge of good and evil. . . . Ah, well, it's not for 
longl" he added. 



"However, you're sleepy, and it's time for 
me to sleep. Go back to G6rkil" said Prince 
Andrew suddenly. 

"Oh, nol" Pierre replied, looking at Prince 
Andrew with frightened, compassionate eyes. 

"Go, gol Before a battle one must have one's 
sleep out," repeated Prince Andrew. 

He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced 
and kissed him. 

"Good-by, be offl" he shouted. "Whether 
we meet again or not . . ." and turning away 
hurriedly he entered the shed. 

It was already dark, and Pierre could not 
make out whether the expression of Prince 
Andrew's face was angry or tender. 

For some time he stood in silence consider- 
ing whether he should follow him or go away. 
"No, he does not want itl" Pierre concluded. 
"And I know that this is our last meeting!" He 
sighed deeply and rode back to G6rki. 

On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay 
down on a rug, but he could not sleep. 

He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded 
another in his imagination. On one of them he 
dwelt long and joyfully. He vividly recalled an 
evening in Petersburg. Natdsha with animated 
and excited face was telling him how she had 
gone to look for mushrooms the previous sum- 
mer and had lost her way in the big forest. She 
incoherently described the depths of the forest, 
her feelings, and a talk with a beekeeper she 
met, and constantly interrupted her story to 
say: "No, I can't! I'm not telling it right; no, 
you don't understand," though he encouraged 
her by saying that he did understand, and he 
really had understood all she wanted to say. 
But Natasha was not satisfied with her own 
words: she felt that they did not convey the 
passionately poetic feeling she had experi- 
enced that day and wished to convey. "He was 
such a delightful old man, and it was so dark 
in the forest . . . and he had such kind . . . No, 
I can't describe it," she had said, flushed and 
excited. Prince Andrew smiled now the same 
happy smile as then when he had looked into 
her eyes. "I understood her," he thought. "I 
not only understood her, but it was just that 
inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frank- 
ness of soulthat very soul of hers which 
seemed to be fettered by her body it was that 
soul I loved in her . . . loved so strongly and 
happily . . ." and suddenly he remembered how 
his love had ended. "He did not need anything 
of that kind. He neither saw nor understood 
anything of the sort. He only saw in her a 
pretty and fresh young girl, with whom he did 



444 



not deign to unite his fate. And I? . 
is still alive and gay!" 

Prince Andrew jumped upas if someone had 
burned him, and again began pacing up and 
down in front of the shed. 

CHAPTER XXVI 

ON AUGUST 25, the eve of the battle of Boro- 
din6, M. de Beausset, prefect of the French 
Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon's quar- 
ters at Valuevo with Colonel Fabvier, the form- 
er from Paris and the latter from Madrid. 

Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset 
ordered a box he had brought for the Emperor 
to be carried before him and entered the first 
compartment of Napoleon's tent, where he be- 
gan opening the boxwhile conversingwith Na- 
poleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him. 

Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at 
the entrance talking to some generals of his 
acquaintance. 

The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his 
bedroom and was finishing his toilet. Slightly 
snorting and grunting, he presented now his 
back and now his plump hairy chest to the 
brush with which his valet was rubbing him 
down. Another valet, with his finger over the 
mouth of a bottle, was sprinkling Eau de Co- 
logne on the Emperor's pampered body with 
an expression which seemed to say that he 
alone knew where and how much Eau de Co- 
logne should be sprinkled. Napoleon's short 
hair was wet and matted on the forehead, but 
his face, though puffy and yellow, expressed 
physical satisfaction. "Go on, harder, go onl" 
he muttered to the valet who was rubbing him, 
slightly twitching and grunting. An aide-de- 
camp, who had entered the bedroom to report 
to the Emperor the number of prisoners taken 
in yesterday's action, was standing by the door 
after delivering his message, awaiting permis- 
sion to withdraw. Napoleon, frowning, looked 
at him from under his brows. 

"No prisoners!" said he, repeating the aide- 
de-camp's words. "They are forcing us to exter- 
minate them. So much the worse for the Rus- 
sian army. ... Go on ... harder, harder!" he 
muttered, hunching his back and presenting 
his fat shoulders. 

"All right. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, 
and Fabvier too/' he said, nodding to the aide- 
de-camp. 

"Yes, sire," and the aide-de-camp disappeared 
through the door of the tent. 

Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and 
wearing the blue uniform of the Guards he 



WAR AND PEACE 

and he 



went with firm quick steps to the reception 
room. 

De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily 
engaged arranging the present he had brought 
from the Empress, on two chairs directly in 
front of the entrance. But Napoleon had 
dressed and come out with such unexpected ra- 
pidity that he had not time to finish arranging 
the surprise. 

Napoleon noticed at once what they were 
about and guessed that they were not ready. 
He did not wish to deprive them of the pleas- 
ure of giving him a surprise, so he pretended 
not to see de Beausset and called Fabvier to 
him, listening silently and with a stern frown 
to what Fabvier told him of the heroism and 
devotion of his troops fighting at Salamanca, 
at the other end of Europe, with but one 
thought to be worthy of their Emperor and 
but one fear to fail to please him. The result 
of that battle had been deplorable. Napoleon 
made ironic remarks during Fabvier's account, 
as if he had not expected that matters could go 
otherwise in his absence. 

"I must make up for that in Moscow," said 
Napoleon. "I'll see you later," he added, and 
summoned de Beausset, who by that time had 
prepared the surprise, having placed something 
on the chairs and covered it with a cloth. 

De Beausset bowed low, with that courtly 
French bow which only the old retainers of 
the Bourbons knew how to make, and ap* 
preached him, presenting an envelope. 

Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his 
ear. 

"You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, 
what is Paris saying?" he asked, suddenly 
changing his former stern expression fora most 
cordial tone. 

"Sire, all Paris regrets your absence," re- 
plied de Beausset as was proper. 

But though Napoleon knew that de Beaus- 
set had to say something of this kind, and 
though in his lucid moments he knew it was 
untrue, he was pleased to hear it from him. 
Again he honored him by touching his ear. 

"I am very sorry to have made you travel so 
far," said he. 

"Sire, I expected nothing less than to find 
you at the gates of Moscow," replied de Beaus- 
set. 

Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absent- 
mindedly, glanced to the right. An aide-de-camp 
approached with gliding steps and offered him 
a gold snuffbox, which he took. 

"Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he 



BOOK TEN 



445 



said, raising the open snuffbox to his nose. 
"You are fond of travel, and in three days you 
will see Moscow. You surely did not expect to 
see that Asiatic capital. You will have a pleas- 
ant journey." 

De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard 
for his taste for travel (of which he had not 
till then been aware). 

"Ha, what's this?" asked Napoleon, noticing 
that all the courtiers were looking at some- 
thing concealed under a cloth. 

With courtly adroitness de Beausset half 
turned and without turning his back to the 
Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the 
cloth at the same time, and said: 

"A present to Your Majesty from the Em- 
press." 

It was a portrait, painted in bright colors by 
Gerard, of the son iDorne to Napoleon by the 
daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy 
whom for some reason everyone called "The 
King of Rome." 

A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look 
of the Christ in the Sistine Madonna was de- 
picted playing at stick and ball. The ball rep- 
resented the terrestrial globe and the stick in 
his other hand a scepter. 

Though it was not clear what the artist meant 
to express by depicting the so-called King of 
Rome spiking the earth with a stick, the alle- 
gory apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it 
had done to all who had seen it in Paris, quite 
clear and very pleasing. 

"The King of Rome!" he said, pointing to 
the portrait with a graceful gesture. "Admi- 
rable!" 

With the natural capacity of an Italian for 
changing the expression of his face at will, he 
drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a 
look of pensive tenderness. He felt that what 
he now said and did would be historical, and 
it seemed to him that it would now be best for 
him whose grandeur enabled his son to play 
stick and ball with the terrestrial globe to 
show, in contrast to that grandeur, the sim- 
plest paternal tenderness. His eyes grew dim, 
he moved forward, glanced round at a chair 
(which seemed to place itself under him), and 
sat down on it before the portrait. At a single 
gesture from him everyone went out on tiptoe, 
leaving the great man to himself and his emo- 
tion. 

Having sat still for a while he touched him- 
self not knowing why the thick spot of paint 
representing the highest light in the portrait, 
rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer 



on duty. He ordered the portrait to be carried 
outside his tent, that the Old Guard, stationed 
round it, might not be deprived of the pleas- 
ure of seeing the King of Rome, the son and 
heir of their adored monarch. 

And while lie was doing M. de Beausset the 
honor of breakfasting with him, they heard, as 
Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries 
of the officers and men of the Old Guard who 
had run up to see the portrait. 

"Vive I'Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive 
I'Empereur!" came those ecstatic cries. 

After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's 
presence dictated his order of the day to the 
army. 

"Short and energetic!" he remarked when he 
had read over the proclamation which he had 
dictated straight off without corrections. It 
ran: 

Soldiers! This is the battle you have so longed 
for. Victory depends on you. It is essential for us; 
it will give us all we need: comfortable quarters 
and a speedy return to our country. Behave as you 
did at Austerlkz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and Srno- 
16nsk. Let our remotest posterity recall your 
achievements this day with pride. Let it be said of 
each of you: "He was in the great battle before 
Moscow 1" 

"Before Moscow!" repeated Napoleon, and 
inviting M. de Beausset, who was so fond of 
travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went 
out of the tent to where the horses stood sad- 
dled. 

"Your Majesty is too kind! "replied de Beaus- 
set to the invitation to accompany the Emper- 
or; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to 
ride and was afraid of doing so. 

But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and 
de Beausset had to mount. When Napoleon 
came out of the tent theshouting of the Guards 
before his son's portrait grew still louder. Na- 
poleon frowned. 

"Take him away!" he said, pointing with a 
gracefully majestic gesture to the portrait. "It 
is too soon for him to see a field of battle." 

De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, 
and sighed deeply, to indicate how profoundly 
he valued and comprehended the Emperor's 
words. 

CHAPTER XXVII 

ON THE TWENTY-FIFTH OF AUGUST, SO his histO- 

rians tell us, Napoleon spent the whole day on 
horseback inspecting the locality, considering 
plans submitted to him by his marshals, and 
personally giving commands to his generals. 



446 



WAR AND PEACE 



The original line of the Russian forces along 
the river KolochA had been dislocated by the 
capture of the Shevdrdino Redoubt on the 
twenty-fourth, and part of the linethe left 
flank had been drawn back. That part of the 
line was not entrenched and in front of it the 
ground was more open and level than else- 
where. It was evident to anyone, military or 
not, that it was here the French should attack. 
It would seem that not much consideration 
was needed to reach this conclusion, nor any 
particular care or trouble on the part of the 
Emperor and his marshals, nor was there any 
need of that special and supreme quality 
called genius that people are so apt to ascribe 
to Napoleon; yet the historians who described 
the event later and the men who then sur- 
rounded Napoleon, and he himself, thought 
otherwise. 

Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed 
the locality with a profound air and in silence, 
nodded with approval or shook his head du- 
biously, and without communicating to the 
generals around him the profound course of 
ideas which guided his decisions merely gave 
them his final conclusions in the form of com- 
mands. Having listened to a suggestion from 
Davout,who was now called Prince d'Eckmiihl, 
to turn the Russian left wing, Napoleon said 
it should not be done, without explaining why 
not. To a proposal made by General Campan 
(who was to attack the fleches) to lead his divi- 
sion through the woods, Napoleon agreed, 
though the so-called Duke of Elchingen (Ney) 
ventured to remark that a movement through 
the woods was dangerous and might disorder 
the division. 

Having inspected the country opposite the 
Shevardino Redoubt, Napoleon pondered a 
little in silence and then indicated the spots 
where two batteries should be set up by the 
morrow to act against the Russian entrench- 
ments, and the places where, in line with them, 
the field artillery should be placed. 

After giving these and other commands he 
returned to his tent, and the dispositions for 
the battle were written down from his dicta- 
tion. 

These dispositions, of which the French his- 
torians write with enthusiasm and other his- 
torians with profound respect, were as follows: 

At dawn the two new batteries established dur- 
ing the night on the plain occupied by the Prince 
d'Eckmiihl will open fire on the two opposing 
batteries of the enemy. 

At the same time the commander of the artil- 



lery of the ist Corps, General Pernetti, with thirty 
cannon of Campan's division and all the howitzers 
of Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will move for- 
ward, open fire, and overwhelm with shellfire the 
enemy's battery, against which will operate: 

24 guns of the artillery of the Guards 
30 guns of Campan's division 
and 8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions 

in all 62 guns. 

The commander of the artillery of the grd 
Corps, General Fouch, will place the howitzers of 
the srd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all, on the flanks 
of the battery that is to bombard the entrench- 
ment on the left, which will have forty guns in 
all directed against it. 

General Sorbier must be ready at the first order 
to advance with all the howitzers of the Guard's 
artillery against either one or other of the en- 
trenchments. 

During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to 
advance through the wood on the village and turn 
the enemy's position. 

General Campan will move through the wood 
to seize the first fortification. 

After the advance has begun in this manner, 
orders will be given in accordance with the en- 
emy's movements. 

The cannonade on the left flank will begin as 
soon as the guns of the right wing are heard. The 
sharpshooters of Morand's division and of the 
vice-King's 1 division will open a heavy fire on see- 
ing the attack commence on the right wing. 

The vice-King will occupy the village and cross 
by its three bridges, advancing to the same heights 
as Morand's and Gerard's divisions, which under 
his leadership will be directed against the redoubt 
arid come into line with the rest of the forces. 

All this must be done in good order (le tout se 
fera avec ordre et melhode) as far as possible re- 
taining troops in reserve. 

The Imperial Camp near Mozhdysk, 

September, 6, 2 1812. 

These dispositions, which are very obscure 
and confused if one allows oneself to regard 
the arrangements without religious awe of his 
genius, related to Napoleon's orders to deal 
with four points four different orders. Not 
one of these was, or could be, carried out. 

In the disposition it is said first that the bat- 
teries placed on the spot chosen by Napoleon, 
with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche 1 which 
were to come in line with them, 102 guns in 
all, were to open fire and shower shells on the 
Russian fldches and redoubts. This could not 

1 Murat.-TR. 

8 The date of this French proclamation is New 
Style, and corresponds to August 25, Old Style. 
TR. 



BOOK 

be done, as from the spots selected by Napo- 
leon the projectiles did not carry to the Russian 
works, and those 102 guns shot into the air un- 
til the nearest commander, contrary to Napo- 
leon's instructions, moved them forward. 

The second order was that Poniatowski, 
moving to the village through the wood, should 
turn the Russian left flank. This could not be 
done and was not done, because Poniatowski, 
advancing on the village through the wood, 
met Tuchk6v there barring his way, and could 
not and did not turn the Russian position. 

The third order was: General Campan will 
move through the wood to seize the first forti- 
fication. General Campan's division did not 
seize the first fortification but was driven back, 
for on emerging from the wood it had to re- 
form under grapeshot, of which Napoleon was 
unaware. 

The fourth order was: The vice-King will 
occupy the village (Borodin6) and cross by its 
three bridges, advancing to the same heights 
as Morand's and Gerard's divisions (for whose 
movements no directions are given), which un- 
der his leadership will be directed against the 
redoubt and come into line with the rest of 
the forces. 

As far as one can make out, not so much from 
this unintelligible sentence as from the at- 
tempts the vice-King made to execute the or- 
ders given him, he was to advance from the 
left through Borodino to the redoubt while the 
divisions of Morand and Gerard were to ad- 
vance simultaneously from the front. 

All this, like the other parts of the disposi- 
tion, was not and could not be executed. Aft- 
er passing through Borodino the vice-King was 
driven back to the Kolocha and could get no 
farther; while the divisions of Morand and Ge*- 
rard did not take the redoubt but were driv- 
en back, and the redoubt was only taken at the 
end of the battle by the cavalry (a thing prob- 
ably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon). 
So not one of the orders in the disposition was, 
or could be, executed. But in the disposition 
it is said that, after the fight has commenced in 
this manner, orders will be given in accordance 
with the enemy's movements, and so it might 
be supposed that all necessary arrangements 
would be made by Napoleon during the bat- 
tle. But this was not and could not be done, 
for during the whole battle Napoleon was 
so far away that, as appeared later, he could 
not know the course of the battle and not 
one of his orders during the fight could be 
executed. 



TEN 447 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

MANY HISTORIANS SAY that the French did not 
win the battle of Borodin6 because Napoleon 
had a cold, and that if he had not had a cold 
the orders he gave before and during the bat- 
tle would have been still more full of genius 
and Russia would have been lost and the face 
of the world have been changed. To historians 
who believe that Russia was shaped by the 
will of one manPeter the Great and that 
France from a republic became an empire and 
French armies went to Russia at the will of 
one man Napoleon to say that Russia re- 
mained a power because Napoleon had a bad 
cold on the twenty-fourth of August may seem 
logical and convincing. 

If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fight 
or not to fight the battle of Borodin6, and if 
this or that other arrangement depended on 
his will, then evidently a cold affecting the 
manifestation of his will might have saved Rus- 
sia, and consequently the valet who omitted 
to bring Napoleon his waterproof boots on the 
twenty-fourth would have been the savior of 
Russia. Along that line of thought such a de- 
duction is indubitable, as indubitable as the 
deduction Voltaire made in jest (without 
knowing what he was jesting at) when he saw 
that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was due 
to Charles IX's stomach being deranged. But 
to men who do not admit that Russia was 
formed by the will of one man, Peter I, or that 
the French Empire was formed and the war 
with Russia begun by the will of one man, Na- 
poleon, that argument seems not merely un- 
true and irrational, but contrary to all human 
reality. To the question of what causes historic 
events another answer presents itself, namely, 
that the course of human events is predeter- 
mined from on high depends on the coinci- 
dence of the wills of all who take part in the 
events, and that a Napoleon's influence on the 
course of these events is purely external and 
fictitious. 

Strange as at first glance it may seem to sup- 
pose that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was 
not due to Charles IX's will, though he gave 
the order for it and thought it was done as a 
result of that order; and strange as it may seem 
to suppose that the slaughter of eighty thou- 
sand men at Borodin6 was not due to Napo- 
leon's will, though he ordered the commence- 
ment and conduct of the battle and thought it 
was done because he ordered it; strange as 
these suppositions appear, yet human dignity 
which tells me that each of us is, if not more 



448 



WAR AND PEACE 



at least not less a man than the great Napole- 
ondemands the acceptance of that solution of 
the question, and historic investigation abun- 
dantly confirms it. 

At the battle of Borodin6 Napoleon shot at 
no one and killed no one. That was all done 
by the soldiers. Therefore it was not he who 
killed people. 

The French soldiers went to kill and be 
killed at the battle of Borodin6 not because of 
Napoleon's orders but by their own volition. 
The whole army French, Italian, German, 
Polish, and Dutch hungry, ragged, and weary 
of the campaign, felt at the sight of an army 
blocking their road to Moscow that the wine 
was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleon 
then forbidden them to fight the Russians, they 
would have killed him and have proceeded to 
fight the Russians because it was inevitable. 

When they heard Napoleon's proclamation 
offering them, as compensation for mutilation 
and death, the words of posterity about their 
having been in the battle before Moscow, they 
cried "Vive I'Empereur!" just as they had cried 
"Vive I'Empereur!" at the sight of the portrait 
of the boy piercing the terrestrial globe with a 
toy stick, and just as they would have cried 
"Vive I'Empereur !" at any nonsense that might 
be told them. There was nothing left for them 
to do but cry "Vive I'Empereur!" and go to 
fight, in order to get food and rest as conquer- 
ors in Moscow. So it was not because of Napo- 
leon's commands that they killed their fellow 
men. 

And it was not Napoleon who directed the 
course of the battle, for none of his orders were 
executed and during the battle he did not 
know what was going on before him. So the 
way in which these people killed one another 
was not decided by Napoleon's will but oc- 
curred independently of him, in accord with 
the will of hundreds of thousands of people 
who took part in the common action. It only 
seemed to Napoleon that it all took place by 
his will. And so the question whether he had 
or had not a cold has no more historic interest 
than the cold of the least of the transport sol- 
diers. 

Moreover, the assertion made by various writ- 
ers that his cold was the cause of his disposi- 
tions not being as well planned as on former 
occasions, and of his orders during the battle 
not being as good as previously, is quite base- 
less, which again shows that Napoleon's cold 
on the twenty-sixth of August was unimpor- 
tant. 



The dispositions cited above are not at all 
worse, but are even better, than previous dis- 
positions by which he had won victories. His 
pseudo-orders during the battle were also no 
worse than formerly, but much the same as us- 
ual. These dispositions and orders only seem 
worse than previous ones because the battle of 
Borodin6 was the first Napoleon did not win. 
The profounclest and most excellent disposi- 
tions and orders seem very bad, and every 
learned militarist criticizes them with looks of 
importance, when they relate to a battle that 
has been lost, and the very worst dispositions 
and orders seem very good, and serious people 
fill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits, 
when they relate to a battle that has been won. 

The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother 
for the battle of Austerlitz were a model of per- 
fection for that kind of composition, but still 
they were criticized criticized for their very 
perfection, for their excessive minuteness. 

Napoleon at the battle of Borodin6 fulfilled 
his office as representative of authority as well 
as, and even better than, at other battles. He 
did nothing harmful to the progress of the bat- 
tle; he inclined to the most reasonable opin- 
ions, he made no confusion, did not contradict 
himself, did not get frightened or run away 
from the field of battle, but with his great tact 
and military experience carried out his role of 
appearing to command, calmly and with dig- 
nity. 

CHAPTER XXIX 

ON RETURNING fromasecond careful inspection 
of the lines, Napoleon remarked: 

"The chessmen are set up, the game will be- 
gin tomorrow I" 

Having ordered punch and summoned de 
Beausset, he began to talk to him about Paris 
and about some changes he meant to make in 
the Empress' household, surprising the prefect 
by his memory of minute details relating to the 
court. 

He showed an interest in trifles, joked about 
de Beausset's love of travel, and chatted care- 
lessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeon who 
knows his job does when turning up his sleeves 
and putting on his apron while a patient is be- 
ing strapped to the operating table. "The mat- 
ter is in my hands and is clear and definite in 
my head. When the times comes to set to work 
I shall do it as no one else could, but now I can 
jest, and the more I jest and the calmer I am 
the more tranquil and confident you ought to 
be, and the more amazed at my genius." 



BOOK 

Having finished his second glass of punch, 
Napoleon went to rest before the serious busi- 
ness which, he considered, awaited him next 
day. He was so much interested in that task that 
he was unable to sleep, and in spite of his cold 
which had grown worse from the dampness of 
the evening, he went into the large division of 
the tent at three o'clock in the morning, loudly 
blowing his nose. He asked whether the Rus- 
sians had not withdrawn, and was told that the 
enemy's fires were still in the same places. He 
nodded approval. 

The adjutant in attendance came into the 
tent. 

"Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do good 
business today?" Napoleon asked him. 

"Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp. 

Napoleon looked at him. 

"Do you remember, sire, what you did me the 
honor to say at Smolensk?" continued Rapp. 
"The wine is drawn and must be drunk." 

Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long 
time leaning his head on his hand. 

"This poor army!" he suddenly remarked. 
"Jt has diminished greatly since Smolensk. For- 
tune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have al- 
ways said so and I am beginning to experience 
it. But the Guards, Rapp, the Guards are in- 
tact?" he remarked interrogatively. 

"Yes, sire," replied Rapp. 

Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, 
and glanced at his watch. He was not sleepy 
and it was still not nearly morning. It was im- 
possible to give further orders for the sake of 
killing time, for the orders had all been given 
and were now being executed. 

"Have the biscuits and rice been served out 
to the regiments of the Guards?" asked Napo- 
leon sternly. 

"Yes, sire." 

"The rice too?" 

Rapp replied that he had given the Emper- 
or's order about the rice, but Napoleon shook 
his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing 
that his order had been executed. An attend- 
ant came in with punch. Napoleon ordered an- 
other glass to be brought for Rapp, and silent- 
ly sipped his own. 

"I have neither taste nor smell," he remarked, 
sniffing at his glass. "This cold is tiresome. 
They talk about medicinewhat is the good of 
medicine when it can't cure a coldl Corvisart 
gave me these lozenges but they don't help at 
all. What can doctors cure? One can't cure 
anything. Our body is a machine for living. It 
is organized for that, it is its nature. Let life go 



TEN 449 

on in it unhindered and let it defend itself, it 
will do more than if you paralyze it by encum- 
bering it with remedies. Our body is like a 
perfect watch that should go for a certain time; 
the watchmaker cannot open it, he can only ad- 
just it by fumbling, and that blindfold. . . . 
Yes, our body is a machine for living, that is all." 
And having entered on the path of defini- 
tion, of which he was fond, Napoleon suddenly 
and unexpectedly gave a new one. 

"Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" 
asked he. "It is the art of being stronger than 
the enemy at a given moment. That's all." 

Rapp made no reply. 

"Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Ku- 
tuzov!" said Napoleon. "We shall see! Do you 
remember at Braunau he commanded an army 
for three weeks and did not once mount a 
horse to inspect his entrenchments. . . . We 
shall see!" 

He looked at his watch. It was still only four 
o'clock. He did not feel sleepy. The punch was 
finished and there was still nothing to do. He 
rose, walked to and fro, put on a warm over- 
coat and a hat, and went out of the tent. The 
night was dark and damp, a scarcely percepti- 
ble moisture was descending from above. Near 
by, the campfires were dimly burning among 
the French Guards, and in the distance those 
of the Russian line shone through the smoke. 
The weather was calm, and the rustle and 
tramp of the French troops already beginning 
to move to take up their positions were clearly 
audible. 

Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, 
looked at the fires and listened to these sounds, 
and as he was passing a tall guardsman in a 
shaggy cap, who was standing sentinel before 
his tent and had drawn himself up like a black 
pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon 
stopped in front of him. 

"What year did you enter the service?" he 
asked with that affectation of military blunt- 
ness and geniality with which he always ad- 
dressed the soldiers. 

The man answered the question. 

"Ah! One of the old onesl Has your regi- 
ment had its rice?" 

"It has, Your Majesty." 

Napoleon nodded and walked away. 

At half-past five Napoleon rode to the vil- 
lage of Shevardino. 

It was growing light, the sky was clearing, on- 
ly a single cloud lay in the east. The aban- 
doned campfires were burning themselves out 



45 

in the faint morning light. 

On the right a single deep report of a can- 
non resounded and died away in the prevail- 
ing silence. Some minutes passed. A second and 
a third report shook the air, then a fourth and 
a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the right. 

The first shots had not yet ceased to rever- 
berate before others rang out and yet more 
were heard mingling with and overtaking one 
another. 

Napoleon with his suite rode up to the She- 
vdrdino Redoubt where he dismounted. The 
game had begun. 

CHAPTER XXX 

ON RETURNING to G6rki after having seen 
Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered his groom to 
get the horses ready and to call him early in the 
morning, and then immediately fell asleep be- 
hind a partition in a corner Boris had given 
up to him. 

Before he was thoroughly awake next morn- 
ing everybody had already left the hut. The 
panes were rattling in the little windows and 
his groom was shaking him. 

"Your excellency! Your excellency! Your ex- 
cellency I" he kept repeating pertinaciously 
while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without 
looking at him, having apparently lost hope 
of getting him to wake up. 

"What? Has it begun? Is it time?" Pierre 
asked, waking up. 

"Hear the firing," said the groom, a dis- 
charged soldier. "All the gentlemen have gone 
out, and his Serene Highness himself rode past 
long ago." 

Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the 
porch. Outside all was bright, fresh, dewy, and 
cheerful. The sun, just bursting forth from be- 
hind a cloud that had concealed it, was shining, 
with rays still half broken by the clouds, over 
the roofs of the street opposite, on the dew- 
besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of 
the houses, on the windows, the fence, and on 
Pierre's horses standing before the hut. The 
roar of guns sounded more distinct outside. An 
adjutant accompanied by a Cossack passed by 
at a sharp trot. 

"It's time, Count; it's time!" cried the adju- 
tant. 

Telling the groom to follow him with the 
horses, Pierre went down the street to the knoll 
from which he had looked at the field of battle 
the day before. A crowd of military men was 
assembled there, members of the staff could be 
heard conversing in French, and Kuttizov's 



WAR AND PEACE 



gray head in a white cap with a red band was 
visible, his gray nape sunk between his shoul- 
ders. He was looking through a field glass down 
the highroad before him. 

Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked 
at the scene before him, spellbound by its beau- 
ty. It was the same panorama he had admired 
from that spot the day before, but now the 
whole place was full of troops and covered by 
smoke clouds from the guns, and the slanting 
rays of the bright sun, rising slightly to the left 
behind Pierre, cast upon it through the clear 
morning air penetrating streaks of rosy, golden- 
tinted light and long dark shadows. The forest 
at the farthest extremity of the panorama 
seemed carved in some precious stone of a yel- 
lowish-green color; its undulating outline was 
silhouetted against the horizon and was pierced 
beyond Valuevo by the Smolensk highroad 
crowded with troops. Nearer at hand glittered 
golden cornfields interspersed with copses. 
There were troops to be seen everywhere, in 
front and to the right and left. All this was 
vivid, majestic, and unexpected; but what im- 
pressed Pierre most of all was the view of the 
battlefield itself, of Borodin6 and the hollows 
on both sides of the Kolocha\ 

Above the Kolocha, in Borodin6 and on 
both sides of it, especially to the left where the 
V6yna flowing between its marshy banks falls 
into the Kolochd, a mist had spread which 
seemed to melt, to dissolve, and to become 
translucent when the brilliant sun appeared 
and magically colored and outlined every thing. 
The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist, 
and over the whole expanse and through that 
mist the rays of the morning sun were reflect- 
ed, flashing back like lightning from the water, 
from the dew, and from the bayonets of the 
troops crowded together by the riverbanks 
and in Borodin6. A white church could be 
seen through the mist, and here and there the 
roofs of huts in Borodin6 as well as dense 
masses of soldiers, or green ammunition chests 
and ordnance. And all this moved, or seemed 
to move, as the smoke and mist spread out over 
the whole space. Just as in the mist-enveloped 
hollow near Borodin6, so along the entire line 
outside and above it and especially in the 
woods and fields to the left, in the valleys and 
on the summits of the high ground, clouds of 
powder smoke seemed continually to spring 
up out of nothing, now singly, now several at 
a time, some translucent, others dense, which, 
swelling, growing, rolling, and blending, ex- 
tended over the whole expanse. 



BOOK TEN 



45' 



These puffs of smoke and (strange to say) 
the sound of the firing produced the chief beau- 
ty of the spectacle. 

"Puff!" suddenly a round compact cloud of 
smoke was seen merging from violet into gray 
and milky white, and "boom!" came the re- 
port a second later. 

"Puff! puff!" and two clouds arose pushing 
one another and blending together; and 
"boom, boom!" came the sounds confirming 
what the eye had seen. 

Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which 
he had seen as a round compact ball, and in its 
place already were balloons of smoke floating 
to one side, and "puff" (with a pause) "puff, 
puff!" three and then four more appeared 
and then from each, with the same interval 
"boom boom, boom!" came the fine, firm, 
precise sounds in reply. It seemed as if those 
smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes 
stood still while woods, fields, and glittering 
bayonets ran past them. From the left, over 
fields and bushes, those large balls of smoke 
were continually appearing followed by their 
solemn reports, while nearer still, in the hol- 
lows and woods, there burst from the muskets 
small cloudlets that had no time to become 
balls, but had their little echoes in just the 
same way. "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came the fre- 
quent crackle of musketry, but it was irregular 
and feeble in comparison with the reports of 
the cannon. 

Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, 
those shining bayonets, that movement, and 
those sounds. He turned to look at Kutuzov 
and his suite, to compare his impressions with 
those of others. They were all looking at the 
field of battle as he was, and, as it seemed to 
him, with the same feelings. All their faces 
were now shining with that latent warmth of 
feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and 
had fully understood after his talk with Prince 
Andrew. 

"Go, my dear fellow, go ... and Christ be 
with you I" Kutuzov was saying to a general 
who stood beside him, not taking his eye from 
the battlefield. 

Having received this order the general 
passed by Pierre on his way down the knoll. 

"To the crossing!" said the general coldly 
and sternly in reply to one of the staff who 
asked where he was going. 

'Til go there too, I tool" thought Pierre, and 
followed the general. 

The general mounted a horse a Cossack had 
brought him. Pierre went to his groom who 



was holding his horses and, asking which was 
the quietest, clambered onto it, seized it by 
the mane, and turning out his toes pressed his 
heels against its sides and, feeling that his 
spectacles were slipping off but unable to let 
go of the mane and reins, he galloped after the 
general, causing the staff officers to imile as 
they watched him from the knoll. 

CHAPTER XXXI 

HAVING DESCENDED the hill the general after 
whom Pierre was galloping turned sharply to 
the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him, gal- 
loped in among some ranks of infantry march- 
ing ahead of him. He tried to pass either in 
front of them or to the right or left, but there 
were soldiers everywhere, all with the same pre- 
occupied expression and busy with some un- 
seen but evidently important task. They all 
gazed with the same dissatisfied and inquir- 
ing expression at this stout man in a white hat, 
who for some unknown reason threatened to 
trample them under his horse's hoofs. 

"Why ride into the middle of the battalion?" 
one of them shouted at him. 

Another prodded his horse with the butt 
end of a musket, and Pierre, bending over his 
saddlebow and hardly able to control his shy- 
ing horse, galloped ahead of the soldiers where 
there was a free space. 

There was a bridge ahead of him, where oth- 
er soldiers stood firing. Pierre rode up to them. 
Without being aware of it he had come to the 
bridge across the Kolochd between G6rki and 
Borodin6, which the French (having occupied 
Borodin6) were attacking in the first phase of 
the battle. Pierre saw that there was a bridge 
in front of him and that soldiers were doing 
something on both sides of it and in the mead- 
ow, among the rows of new-mown hay which 
he had taken no notice of amid the smoke of 
the campfires the day before; but despite the 
incessant firing going on there he had no idea 
that this was the field of battle. He did not no- 
tice the sound of the bullets whistling from 
every side, or the projectiles that flew over 
him, did not see the enemy on the other side 
of the river, and for a long time did not notice 
the killed and wounded, though many fell near 
him. He looked about him with a smile which 
did not leave his face. 

"Why's that fellow in front of the line?" 
shouted somebody at him again. 

"To the leftl . . . Keep to the right!" the men 
shouted to him. 

Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly 



45* 



WAR AND PEACE 



encountered one of Ra^vski's adjutants whom 
he knew. The adjutant looked angrily at him, 
evidently also intending to shout at him, but 
on recognizing him he nodded. 

"How have you got here?" he said, and gal- 
loped on. 

Pierre, feeling out of place there, having 
nothing to do, and afraid of getting in some- 
one's way again, galloped after the adjutant. 

"What's happening here? May I come with 
you?" he asked. 

"One moment, one moment!" replied the 
adjutant, and riding up to a stout colonel who 
was standing in the meadow, he gave him some 
message and then addressed Pierre. 

"Why have you come here, Count?" he asked 
with a smile. "Still inquisitive?" 

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre. 

But the adjutant turned his horse about and 
rode on. 

"Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Ba- 
grati6n on the left flank they're getting it 
frightfully hot." 

"Really?" said Pierre. "Where is that?" 

"Come along with me to our knoll. We can 
get a view from there and in our battery it is 
still bearable," said the adjutant. "Will you 
come?" 

"Yes, I'll come with you," replied Pierre, 
looking round for his groom. 

It was only now that he noticed wounded 
men staggering along or being carried on 
stretchers. On that very meadow he had rid- 
den over the day before, a soldier was lying 
athwart the rows of scented hay, with his head 
thrown awkwardly back and his shako off. 

"Why haven't they carried him away?" Pierre 
was about to ask, but seeing the stern expres- 
sion of the adjutant who was also looking that 
way, he checked himself. 

Pierre did not find his groom and rode 
along the hollow with the adjutant to RacV 
ski's Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the ad- 
jutant's and jolted him at every step. 

"You don't seem to be used to riding, 
Count?" remarked the adjutant. 

"No, it's not that, but her action seems so 
jerky," said Pierre in a puzzled tone. 

"Why . . . she's wounded!" said the adju- 
tant. "In the off foreleg above the knee. A bul- 
let, no doubt. I congratulate you, Count, on 
your baptism of fire!" 

Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth 
Corps, behind the artillery which had been 
moved forward and was in action, deafening 
them with the noise of firing, they came to a 



small wood. There it was cool and quiet, with 
a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutant dis- 
mounted and walked up the hill on foot. 

"Is the general here?" asked the adjutant 
on reaching the knoll. 

"He was here a minute ago but has just gone 
that way," someone told him, pointing to the 
right. 

The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled 
what to do with him now. 

"Don't trouble about me," said Pierre. "I'll 
go up onto the knoll if I may?" 

"Yes, do. You'll see everything from there 
and it's less dangerous, and I'll come for you." 

Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant 
rode on. They did not meet again, and only 
much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm 
that day. 

The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that 
famous one afterwards known to the Russians 
as the Knoll Battery or RacH'ski's Redoubt, 
and to the French as la grande redoute, la fa- 
tale redoute, la redoute du centre, around 
which tens of thousands fell, and which the 
French regarded as the key to the whole po- 
sition. 

This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three 
sides of which trenches had been dug. Within 
the entrenchment stood ten guns that were 
being fired through openings in the earth- 
work. 

In line with the knoll on both sides stood 
other guns which also fired incessantly. A little 
behind the guns stood infantry. When ascend- 
ing that knoll Pierre had no notion that this 
spot, on which small trenches had been dug 
and from which a few guns were firing, was 
the most important point of the battle. 

On the contrary, just because he happened 
to be there he thought it one of the least sig- 
nificant parts of the field. 

Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down 
at one end of a trench surrounding the battery 
and gazed at what was going on around him 
with an unconsciously happy smile. Occasion- 
ally he rose and walked about the battery still 
with that same smile, trying not to obstruct 
the soldiers who were loading, hauling the 
guns, and continually running past him with 
bags and charges. The guns of that battery were 
being fired continually one after another with 
a deafening roar, enveloping the whole neigh- 
borhood in powder smoke. 

In contrast with the dread felt by the in- 
fantrymen placed in support, here in the bat- 
tery where a small number of men busy at their 



BOOK 

work were separated from the rest by a trench, 
everyone experienced a common and as it were 
family feeling of animation. 

The intrusion of Pierre's nonmilitary figure 
in a white hat made an unpleasant impression 
at first. The soldiers looked askance at him with 
surprise and even alarm as they went past him. 
The senior artillery officer, a tall, long-legged, 
pockmarked man, moved over to Pierre as if 
to see the action of the farthest gun and looked 
at him with curiosity. 

A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still 
and evidently only just out of the Cadet Col- 
lege, who was zealously commanding the two 
guns entrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly. 

"Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to 
stand aside. You must not be here." 

The soldiers shook their heads disapprov- 
ingly as they looked at Pierre. But when they 
had convinced themselves that this man in the 
white hat was doing no harm, but either sat 
quietly on the slope of the trench with a shy 
smile or, politely making way for the soldiers, 
paced up and down the battery under fire as 
calmly as if he were on a boulevard, their feel- 
ing of hostile distrust gradually began to 
change into a kindly and bantering sympathy, 
such as soldiers feel for their dogs, cocks, goats, 
and in general for the animals that live with 
the regiment. The men soon accepted Pierre 
into their family, adopted him, gave him a 
nickname ("our gentleman"), and made kind- 
ly fun of him among themselves. 

A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pi- 
erre and he looked around with a smile as he 
brushed from his clothes some earth it had 
thrown up. 

"And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really 
now?" a red-faced, broad-shouldered soldier 
asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a set 
of sound, white teeth. 

"Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre. 

"What else do you expect?" answered the 
soldier. "She has no mercy, you know! When 
she comes spluttering down, out go your in- 
nards. One can't help being afraid," he said 
laughing. 

Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, 
stopped beside Pierre. They seemed not to have 
expected him to talk like anybody else, and the 
discovery that he did so delighted them. 

"It's the business of us soldiers. But in a 
gentleman it's wonderful! There's a gentle- 
man for you I" 

"To your places!" cried the young officer to 
the men gathered round Pierre. 



TEN 453 

The young officer was evidently exercising 
his duties for the first or second time and 
therefore treated both his superiors and the 
men with great precision and formality. 

The booming cannonade and the fusillade 
of musketry were growing more intense over 
the whole field, especially to the left where Ba- 
grati6n's fleches were, but where Pierre was 
the smoke of the firing made it almost im- 
possible to distinguish anything. Moreover, 
his whole attention was engrossed by watch- 
ing the family circle separated from all else 
formed by the men in the battery. His first 
unconscious feeling of joyful animation pro- 
duced by the sights and sounds of the battle- 
field was now replaced by another, especially 
since he had seen that soldier lying alone in 
the hayfield. Now, seated on the slope of the 
trench, he observed the faces of those around 
him. 

By ten o'clock some twenty men had already 
been carried away from the battery; two guns 
were smashed and cannon balls fell more and 
more frequently on the battery and spent 
bullets buzzed and whistled around. But the 
men in the battery seemed not to notice this, 
and merry voices and jokes were heard on all 
sides. 

"A live one!" shouted a man as a whistling 
shell approached. 

"Not this wayl To the infantry!" added an- 
other with loud laughter, seeing the shell fly 
past and fall into the ranks of the supports. 

"Are you bowing to a friend, eh?" remarked 
another, chaffing a peasant who ducked low 
as a cannon ball flew over. 

Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the 
trench, looking out to see what was happen- 
ing in front. 

"They've withdrawn the front line, it has 
retired," said they, pointing over the earth- 
work. 

"Mind your own business," an old sergeant 
shouted at them. "If they've retired it's because 
there's work for them to do farther back." 

And the sergeant, taking one of the men by 
the shoulders, gave him a shove with his knee. 
This was followed by a burst of laughter. 

"To the fifth gun, wheel it up!" came shouts 
from one side. 

"Now then, all together, like bargees!" rose 
the merry voices of those who were moving the 
gun. 

"Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman's hat 
off!" cried the red-faced humorist, showing his 
teeth and chaffing Pierre. "Awkward baggage!" 



454 WAR AND PEACE 

he added reproachfully to a cannon ball that 
struck a cannon wheel and a man's leg. 

"Now then, you foxes!" said another, laugh- 
ing at some militiamen who, stooping low, en- 
tered the battery to carry away the wounded 
man. 

"So this gruel isn't to your taste? Oh, you 
crows! You're scared!" they shouted at the mi- 
litiamen who stood hesitating before the man 
whose leg had been torn off. 

"There, lads . . . oh, oh!" they mimicked the 
peasants, "they don't like it at all!" 

Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit 
the redoubt, and after every loss, the liveliness 
increased more and more. 

As the flames of the fire hidden within come 
more and more vividly and rapidly from an 
approaching thundercloud, so, as if in opposi- 
tion to what was taking place, the lightning of 
hidden fire growing more and more intense 
glowed in the faces of these men. 

Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and 
was not concerned to know what was happen- 
ing there; he was entirely absorbed in watch- 
ing this fire which burned ever more brightly 
and which he felt was flaming up in the same 
way in his own soul. 

At ten o'clock the infantry that had been 
among the bushes in front of the battery and 
along the Kdmenka streamlet retreated. From 
the battery they could be seen running back 
past it carrying their wounded on their mus- 
kets. A general with his suite came to the bat- 
tery, and after speaking to the colonel gave 
Pierre an angry look and went away again 
having ordered the infantry supports behind 
the battery to lie down, so as to be less ex- 
posed to fire. After this from amid the ranks 
of infantry to the right of the battery came the 
sound of a drum and shouts of command, and 
from the battery one saw how those ranks of 
infantry moved forward. 

Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and 
was particularly struck by a pale young officer 
who, letting his sword hang down, was walking 
backwards and kept glancing uneasily around. 

The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid 
the smoke but their long-drawn shout and rap- 
id musketry firing could still be heard. A few 
minutes later crowds of wounded men and 
stretcher-bearers came back from that direction. 
Projectiles began to fall still more frequently 
in the battery. Several men were lying about 
who had not been removed. Around the cannon 
the men moved still more briskly and busily. No 
one any longer took notice of Pierre. Once or 



twice he was shouted at for being in the way. 
The senior officer moved with big, rapid strides 
from one gun to another with a frowning face. 
The young officer, with his face still more 
flushed, commanded the men more scrupulous- 
ly than ever. The soldiers handed up the 
charges, turned, loaded, and did their business 
with strained smartness. They gave little jumps 
as they walked, as though they were on springs. 

The storrncloud had come upon them, and 
in every face the fire which Pierre had watched 
kindle burned up brightly. Pierre was standing 
beside the commanding officer. The young offi- 
cer, his hand to his shako, ran up to his su- 
perior. 

"I have the honor to report, sir, that only 
eight rounds are left. Are we to continue fir- 
ing?" he asked. 

"Grapcshot!" the senior shouted, without 
answering the question, looking over the wall 
of the trench. 

Suddenly something happened: the young 
officer gave a gasp and benclingdouble sat down 
on the ground like a bird shot on the wing. 
Everything became strange, confused, and 
misty in Pierre's eyes. 

One cannon ball after another whistled by 
and struck the earthwork, a soldier, or a gun. 
Pierre, who had not noticed these sounds be- 
fore, now heard nothing else. On the right of 
the battery soldiers shouting "Hurrah!" were 
running not forwards but backwards, it seemed 
to Pierre. 

A cannon ball struck the very end of the 
earthwork by which he was standing, crumbling 
down the earth; a black ball flashed before his 
eyes and at the same instant plumped into 
something. Some militiamen who were enter- 
ing the battery ran back. 

"All with grapeshotl" shouted the officer. 

The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a 
frightened whisper informed him (as a butler 
at dinner informs his master that there is no 
more of some wine asked for) that there were 
no more charges. 

"The scoundrels! What are they doing?" 
shouted the officer, turning to Pierre. 

The officer's face was red and perspiring and 
his eyes glittered under his frowning brow. 

"Run to the reserves and bring up the am- 
munition boxes!" he yelled, angrily avoiding 
Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men. 

"I'll go," said Pierre. 

The officer, without answering him, strode 
across to the opposite side. 

"Don't fire Wait!" he shouted. 



BOOK TEN 



455 



The man who had been ordered to go for 
ammunition stumbled against Pierre. 

"Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, 
and ran down the slope. 

Pierre ran after him, avoiding the spot where 
the young officer was sitting. 

One cannon ball, another, and a third flew 
over him, falling in front, beside, and behind 
him. Pierre ran down the slope. "Where am I 
going?" he suddenly asked himself when he 
was already near the green ammunition wag- 
ons. He halted irresolutely, not knowing 
whether to return or go on. Suddenly a terrible 
concussion threw him back wards to the ground. 
At the same instant he was da/zled by a great 
flash of flame, and immediately a deafening 
roar, crackling, and whistling made his ears 
tingle. 

When he came to himself he was sitting on 
the ground leaning on his hands; the ammu- 
nition wagons he had been approaching no 
longer existed, only charred green boards and 
rags littered the scorched grass, and a horse, 
dangling fragments of its shaft behind it, gal- 
loped past, while another horse lay, like Pi- 
erre, on the ground, uttering prolonged and 
piercing cries. 

CHAPTER XXXII 

BESIDE HIMSELF with terror Pierre jumped up 
and ran back to the battery, as to the only ref- 
uge from the horrors that surrounded him. 

On entering the earthwork he noticed that 
there were men doing something there but that 
no shots were being fired from the battery. He 
had no time to realize who these men were. He 
saw the senior officer lying on the earth wall 
with his back turned as if he were examining 
something down below and that one of the sol- 
diers he had noticed before was struggling for- 
ward shouting "Brothers!" and trying to free 
himself from some men who were holding him 
by the arm. He also saw something else that 
was strange. 

But he had not time to realize that the colo- 
nel had been killed, that the soldier shouting 
"Brothers!" was a prisoner, and that another 
man had been bayoneted in the back before 
his eyes, for hardly had he run into the re- 
doubt before a thin, sallow-faced, perspiring 
man in a blue uniform rushed on him sword 
in hand, shouting something. Instinctively 
guarding against the shockfor they had been 
running together at full speed before they saw 
one another Pierre put out his hands and 
seized the man (a French officer) by the shoul- 



der with one hand and by the throat with the 
other. The officer, dropping his sword, seized 
Pierre by his collar. 

For some seconds they gazed with frightened 
eyes at one another's unfamiliar faces and both 
were perplexed at what they had done and 
what they were to do next. "Am I taken pris- 
oner or have I taken him prisoner?" each was 
thinking. But the French officer was evidently 
more inclined to think he had been taken pris- 
oner because Pierre's strong hand, impelled by 
instinctive fear, squeezed his throat ever tight- 
er and tighter. The Frenchman was about to 
say something, when just above their heads, 
terrible and low, a cannon ball whistled, and 
it seemed to Pierre that the French officer's 
head had been torn off, so swiftly had he 
ducked it. 

Pierre too bent his head and let his hands 
fall. Without further thought as to who had 
taken whom prisoner, the Frenchman ran back 
to the battery and Pierre ran down the slope 
stumbling over the dead and wounded who, it 
seemed to him, caught at his feet. But before 
he reached the foot of the knoll he was met by 
a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who, stum- 
bling, tripping up, and shouting, ran merrily 
and wildly toward the battery. (This was the 
attack for which Erm61ov claimed the credit, 
declaring that only his courage and good luck 
made such a feat possible: it was the attack in 
which he was said to have thrown some St. 
George's Crosses he had in his pocket into the 
battery for the first soldiers to take who got 
there.) 

The French who had occupied the battery 
fled, and our troops shouting "Hurrah!" pur- 
sued them so far beyond the battery that it was 
difficult to call them back. 

The prisoners were brought down from the 
battery and among them was a wounded French 
general, whom the officers surrounded. Crowds 
of wounded some known to Pierre and some 
unknown Russians and French, with faces 
distorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and 
were carried on stretchers from the battery. 
Pierre again went up onto the knoll where he 
had spent over an hour, and of that family 
circle which had received him as a member he 
did not find a single one. There were many 
dead whom he did not know, but some he rec- 
ognized. The young officer still sat in the same 
way, bent double, in a pool of blood at the 
edge of the earth wall. The red-faced man was 
still twitching, but they did not carry him 
away. 



456 



WAR AND PEACE 



Pierre ran down the slope once more. 

"Now they will stop it, now they will be hor- 
rified at what they have donel" he thought, 
aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher- 
bearers moving from the battlefield. 

But behind the veil of smoke the sun was 
still high, and in front and especially to the 
left, near Semenovsk, something seemed to be 
seething in the smoke, and the roar of cannon 
and musketry did not diminish, but even in- 
creased to desperation like a man who, strain- 
ing himself, shrieks with all his remaining 
strength. 

CHAPTER XXXIII 

THE CHIEF ACTION of the battle of Borodin6 
was fought within the seven thousand feet be- 
tween Borodin6 and Bagrati6n's fleches. Be- 
yond that space there was, on the one side, a 
demonstration made by the Russians with 
Uvdrov's cavalry at midday, and on the other 
side, beyond Utitsa, Poniatowski's collision 
with Tuchk6v; but these two were detached 
and feeble actions in comparison with what 
took place in the center of the battlefield. On 
the field between Borodin6 and the fleches, be- 
side the wood, the chief action of the day took 
place on an open space visible from both sides 
and was fought in the simplest and most art- 
less way. 

The battle began on both sides with a can- 
nonade from several hundred guns. 

Then when the whole field was covered with 
smoke, two divisions, Campan's and Dessaix's, 
advanced from the French right, while Murat's 
troops advanced on Borodino from their left. 

From the Shevdrdino Redoubt where Napo- 
leon was standing the fleches were two thirds 
of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as 
the crow flies to Borodin6, so that Napoleon 
could not see what was happening there, es- 
pecially as the smoke mingling with the mist 
hid the whole locality. The soldiers of Dessaix's 
division advancing against the fleches could 
only be seen till they had entered the hollow 
that lay between them and the fleches. As soon 
as they had descended into that hollow, the 
smoke of the guns and musketry on the fleches 
grew so dense that it covered the whole ap- 
proach on that side of it. Through the smoke 
glimpses could be caught of something black 
probably menand at times the glint of 
bayonets. But whether they were moving or 
stationary, whether they were French or Rus- 
sian, could not be discovered from the Shevar- 
dino Redoubt. 



The sun had risen brightly and its slanting 
rays struck straight into Napoleon's face as, 
shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at 
the fleches.The smoke spread out before them, 
and at times it looked as if the smoke were 
moving, at times as if the troops moved. Some- 
times shouts were heard through the firing, 
but it was impossible to tell what was being 
done there. 

Napoleon, standing on the. knoll, looked 
through a field glass, and in its small circlet 
saw smoke and men, sometimes his own and 
sometimes Russians, but when he looked 
again with the naked eye, he could not tell 
where what he had seen was. 

He descended the knoll and began walking 
up and down before it. 

Occasionally he stopped, listened to the fir- 
ing, and gazed intently at the battlefield. 

But not only was it impossible to make out 
what was happening from where he was stand- 
ing down below, or from the knoll above on 
which some of his generals had taken their 
stand, but even from the fleches themselves 
in which by this time there were now Russian 
and now French soldiers, alternately or to- 
gether, dead, wounded, alive, frightened, or 
maddened even at those fleches themselves it 
was impossible to make out what was taking 
place. There for several hours amid incessant 
cannon and musketry fire, now Russians were 
seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now in- 
fantry, and now cavalry: they appeared, fired, 
fell, collided, not knowing what to do with 
one another, screamed, and ran back again. 

From the battlefield adjutants he had sent 
out, and orderlies from his marshals, kept 
galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the 
progress of the action, but all these reports 
were false, both because it was impossible in 
the heat of battle to say what was happening 
at any given moment and because many of the 
adjutants did not go to the actual place of 
conflict but reported what they had heard from 
others; and also because while an adjutant was 
riding more than a mile to Napoleon circum- 
stances changed and the news he brought was 
already becoming false. Thus an adjutant gal- 
loped up from Murat with tidings that Boro- 
din6 had been occupied and the bridge over 
the Kolochd was in the hands of the French. 
The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished 
the troops to cross it? Napoleon gave orders 
that the troops should form up on the farther 
side and wait. But before that order was given 
almost as soon in fact as the adjutant had 



BOOK TEN 



457 



left Borodin6 the bridge had been retaken by 
the Russians and burned, in the very skirmish 
at which Pierre had been present at the begin- 
ning of the battle. 

An adjutant galloped up from the fleches 
with a pale and frightened face and reported 
to Napoleon that their attack had been re- 
pulsed, Campan wounded, and Davout killed; 
yet at the very time the adjutant had been told 
that the French had been repulsed, the fitches 
had in fact been recaptured by other French 
troops, and Davout was alive and only slightly 
bruised. On the basis of these necessarily un- 
trustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders, 
which had either been executed before he 
gave them or could not be and were not exe- 
cuted. 

The marshals and generals, who were nearer 
to the field of battle but, like Napoleon, did 
not take part in the actual fighting and only 
occasionally went within musket range, made 
their own arrangements without asking Napo- 
leon and issued orders where and in what di- 
rection to fire and where cavalry should gallop 
and infantry should run. But even theirorders, 
like Napoleon's, were seldom carried out, and 
then but partially. For the most part things 
happened contrary to their orders. Soldiers 
ordered to advance ran back on meetinggrape- 
shot; soldiers ordered to remain where they 
were, suddenly, seeing Russians unexpectedly 
before them, sometimes rushed back and some- 
times forward, and the cavalry dashed without 
orders in pursuit of the flying Russians. In this 
way two cavalry regiments galloped through 
the Semenovsk hollow and as soon as they 
reached the top of the incline turned round 
and galloped full speed back again. The in- 
fantry moved in the same way, sometimes run- 
ning to quite other places than those they 
were ordered to go to. All orders as to where 
and when to move the guns, when to send in- 
fantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the 
Russian infantry all such orders were given 
by the officers on the spot nearest to the units 
concerned, without asking either Ney, Davout, 
or Murat, much less Napoleon. They did not 
fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling or- 
ders or for acting on their own initiative, for 
in battle what is at stake is what is dearest to 
manhis own life and it sometimes seems that 
safety lies in running back, sometimes in run- 
ning forward; and these men who were right 
in the heat of the battle acted according to the 
mood of the moment. In reality, however, all 
these movements forward and backward did 



not improve or alter the position of the troops. 
All their rushing and galloping at one another 
did little harm, the harm of disablement and 
death was caused by the balls and bullets that 
flew over the fields on which these men were 
floundering about. As soon as they left the 
place where the balls and bullets were flying 
about, their superiors, located in the back- 
ground, re-formed them and brought them 
under discipline and under the influence of 
that discipline led them back to the zone of 
fire, where under the influence of fear of death 
they lost their discipline and rushed about ac- 
cording to the chance promptings of the throng. 

CHAPTER XXXIV 

NAPOLEON'S GENERALS Davout, Ney, and Mu- 
rat, who were near that region of fire and 
sometimes even entered it repeatedly led in- 
to it huge masses of well-ordered troops. But 
contrary to what had always happened in their 
former battles, instead of the news they ex- 
pected of the enemy's flight, these orderly 
masses returned thence as disorganized and 
terrified mobs. The generals re-formed them, 
but their numbers constantly decreased. In the 
middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant to 
Napoleon to demand reinforcements. 

Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drink- 
ing punch, when Murat's adjutant galloped 
up with an assurance that the Russians would 
be routed if His Majesty would let him have 
another division. 

"Reinforcements?" said Napoleon in a tone 
of stern surprise, looking at the adjutant a 
handsome lad with long black curls arranged 
like Murat's own as though he did not under- 
stand his words. 

"Reinforcements!" thought Napoleon to 
himself. "How can they need reinforcements 
when they already have half the army directed 
against a weak, unentrenched Russian wing?" 

"Tell the King of Naples," said he sternly, 
"that it is not noon yet, and I don't yet see my 
chessboard clearly. Go! ..." 

The handsome boy adjutant with the long 
hair sighed deeply without removing his hand 
from his hat and galloped back to where men 
were being slaughtered. 

Napoleon rose and having summoned Caul- 
aincourt and Berthier began talking to them 
about matters unconnected with the battle. 

In the midst of this conversation, which was 
beginning to interest Napoleon, Berthier's eyes 
turned to look at a general with a suite, who 
was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering 



458 



WAR AND PEACE 



horse. It was Belliard. Having dismounted he 
went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and 
in a loud voice began boldly demonstrating 
the necessity of sending reinforcements. He 
swore on his honor that the Russians were lost 
if the Emperor would give another division. 

Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and con- 
tinued to pace up and down without replying. 
Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to 
the generals of the suite around him. 

"You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napo- 
leon, when he again came up to the general. 
"In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a 
mistake. Go and have another look and then 
come back to me." 

Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger 
from another part of the battlefield galloped 
up. 

"Now then, what do you want?" asked Na- 
poleon in the tone of a man irritated at being 
continually disturbed. 

"Sire, the prince . . ." began the adjutant. 

"Asks for reinforcements?" said Napoleon 
with an angry gesture. 

The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and 
began to report, but the Emperor turned from 
him, took a couple of steps, stopped, came 
back, and called Berthier. 

"We must give reserves," he said, moving 
his arms slightly apart. "Who do you think 
should be sent there?" he asked of Berthier 
(whom he subsequently termed "that gosling 
I have made an eagle"). 

"Send ClaparMe's division, sire," replied 
Berthier, who knew all the divisions, regi- 
ments, and battalions by heart. 

Napoleon nodded assent. 

The adjutant galloped to Claparede's divi- 
sion and a few minutes later the Young Guards 
stationed behind the knoll moved forward. 
Napoleon gazed silently in that direction. 

"Nol" he suddenly said to Berthier. "I can't 
send Clapar&amp;de. Send Friant's division." 

Though there was no advantage in sending 
Friant's division instead of CJapar&amp;de's, and 
even in obvious inconvenience and delay in 
stopping Claparede and sending Friant now, 
the order was carried out exactly. Napoleon 
did not notice that in regard to his army he 
was playing the part of a doctor who hinders 
by his medicines a role he 10 justly under- 
stood and condemned. 

Friant's division disappeared as the others 
had done into the smoke of the battlefield. 
From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at 
a gallop and as if by agreement all said the 



same thing. They all asked for reinforcements 
and all said that the Russians were holding their 
positions and maintaining a hellish fire under 
which the French army was melting away. 

Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in 
thought. 

M. de Beausset, the man so fond of travel, 
having fasted since morning, came up to the 
Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest 
lunch to His Majesty. 

"I hope I may now congratulate Your Maj- 
esty on a victory?" said he. 

Napoleon silently shook his head in nega- 
tion. Assuming the negation to refer only to 
the victory and not to the lunch, M. de Beaus- 
set ventured with respectful jocularity to re- 
mark that there is no reason for not having 
lunch when one can get it. 

"Go away . . ." exclaimed Napoleon sudden- 
ly and morosely, and turned aside. 

A beatific smile of regret, repentance, and 
ecstasy beamed on M. de Beausset's face and 
he glided away to the other generals. 

Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of de- 
pression like that of an ever-lucky gambler 
who, after recklessly flinging money about and 
always winning, suddenly just when he has 
calculated all the chances of the game, finds 
that the more he considers his play the more 
surely he loses. 

His troops were the same, his generals the 
same, the same preparations had been made, 
the same dispositions, and the same proclama- 
tion courte et tnergique, he himself was still 
the same: he knew that and knew that he was 
now even more experienced and skillful than 
before. Even the enemy was the same as at 
Austerlitz and Friedland yet the terrible stroke 
of his arm had supernaturally become impo- 
tent. 

All the old methods that had been unfail- 
ingly crowned with success: the concentration 
of batteries on one point, an attack by reserves 
to break the enemy's line, and a cavalry attack 
by "the men of iron," all these methods had 
already been employed, yet not only was there 
no victory, but from all sides came the same 
news of generals killed and wounded, of rein- 
forcements needed, of the impossibility of driv- 
ing back the Russians, and of disorganization 
among his own troops. 

Formerly, after he had given two or three 
orders and uttered a few phrases, marshals and 
adjutants had come galloping up with con- 
gratulations and happy faces, announcing the 
trophies taken, the corps of prisoners, bundles 



BOOK TEN 



459 



of enemy eagles and standards, cannon and 
stores, and Murat had only begged leave to 
loose the cavalry to gather in the baggage 
wagons. So it had been at Lodi, Marengo, Ar- 
cola, Jena, Austerlitz, Wagram, and so on. 
But now something strange was happening to 
his troops. 

Despite news of the capture of the fitches, 
Napoleon saw that this was not the same, not 
at all the same, as what had happened in his 
former battles. He saw that what he was feel- 
ing was felt by all the men about him experi- 
enced in the art of war. All their faces looked 
dejected, and they all shunned one another's 
eyes only a de Beausset could fail to grasp the 
meaning of what was happening. 

But Napoleon with hts long experience of 
war well knew the meaning of a battle not 
gained by the attacking side in eight hours, 
after all efforts had been expended. He knew 
that it was a lost battle and that the least acci- 
dent might now with the fight balanced on 
such a strained center destroy him and his 
army. 

When he ran his mind over the whole of 
this strange Russian campaign in which not 
one battle had been won, and in which not a 
flag, or cannon, or army corps had been cap- 
tured in two months, when he looked at the 
concealed depression on the faces around him 
and heard reports of the Russians still holding 
their ground a terrible feeling like a night- 
mare took possession of him, and all the un- 
lucky accidents that might destroy him oc- 
curred to his mind. The Russians might fall 
on his left wing, might break through his cen- 
ter, he himself might be killed by a stray can- 
non ball. All this was possible. In former 
battles he had only considered the possibilities 
of success, but now innumerable unlucky 
chances presented themselves, and he expected 
them all. Yes, it was like a dream in which a 
man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack 
him, and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a 
terrible blow which he knows should annihi- 
late him, but then feels that his arm drops 
powerless and limp like a rag, and the horror 
of unavoidable destruction seizes him in his 
helplessness. 

The news that the Russians were attacking 
the left flank of the French army aroused that 
horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a camp- 
stool below the knoll, with head bowed and 
elbows on his knees. Berthier approached and 
suggested that they should ride along the line 
to ascertain the position of affairs. 



"What? What do you say?" asked Napoleon. 
"Yes, tell them to bring me my horse." 

He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk. 

Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing 
over the whole space through which Napoleon 
rode, horses and men were lying in pools of 
blood, singly or in heaps. Neither Napoleon 
nor any of his generals had ever before seen 
such horrors or so many slain in such a small 
area. The roar of guns, that had not ceased for 
ten hours, wearied the ear and gave a peculiar 
significance to the spectacle, as music does to 
tableaux vivants. Napoleon rode up the high 
ground at Semenovsk, and through the smoke 
saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color un- 
familiar to him. They were Russians. 

The Russians stood in serried ranks behind 
Semenovsk village and its knoll, and their guns 
boomed incessantly along their line and sent 
forth clouds of smoke. It was no longer a bat- 
tle: it was a continuous slaughter which could 
be of no avail either to the French or the Rus- 
sians. Napoleon stopped his horse and again 
fell into the reverie from which Berthier had 
aroused him. He could not stop what was go- 
ing on before him and around him and was 
supposed to be directed by him and to depend 
on him, and from its lack of success this affair, 
for the first time, seemed to him unnecessary 
and horrible. 

One of the generals rode up to Napoleon 
and ventured to offer to lead the Old Guard 
into action. Ney and Berthier, standing near 
Napoleon, exchanged looks and smiled con- 
temptuously at this general's senseless offer. 

Napoleon bowed his head and remained si- 
lent a long time. 

"At eight hundred leagues from France, I 
will not have my Guard destroyed 1" he said, 
and turning his horse rode back toShevdrdino. 

CHAPTER XXXV 

ON THE RUG-COVERED BENCH where Pierre had 
seen him in the morning sat Kutuzov, his gray 
head hanging, his heavy body relaxed. He 
gave no orders, but only assented to or dis- 
sented from what others suggested. 

"Yes, yes, do that," he replied to various 
proposals. "Yes, yes: go, dear boy, and have a 
look," he would say to one or another of those 
about him; or, "No, don't, we'd better wait!" 
He listened to the reports that were brought 
him and gave directions when his subordinates 
demanded that of him; but when listening to 
the reports it seemed as if he were not inter- 
ested in the import of the words spoken, but 



460 

rather in something elsein the expression of 
face and tone of voice of those who were re- 
porting. By long years of military experience 
he knew, and with the wisdom of age under- 
stood, that it is impossible for one man to 
direct hundreds of thousands of others strug- 
gling with death, and he knew that the result 
of a battle is decided not by the orders of a 
commander in chief, nor the place where the 
troops are stationed, nor by the number of 
cannon or of slaughtered men, but by that in- 
tangible force called the spirit of the army, 
and he watched this force and guided it in as 
far as that was in his power. 

Kutiizov's general expression was one of 
concentrated quiet attention, and his face wore 
a strained look as if he found it difficult to 
master the fatigue of his old and feeble body. 

At eleven o'clock they brought him news 
that the (leches captured by the French had 
been retaken, but that Prince Bagration was 
wounded. Kutiizov groaned and swayed his 
head. 

"Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and 
find out about it exactly/' he said to one of his 
adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of 
Wurttemberg who was standing behind him. 

"Will Your Highness please take command 
of the first army?" 

Soon after the duke's departure before he 
could possibly have reached Semenovsk his 
adjutant came back from him and told Kutii- 
zov that the duke asked for more troops. 

Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order 
to Dokhtiirov to take over the command of the 
first army, and a request to the duke whom he 
said he could not spare at such an important 
moment to return to him. When they brought 
him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, 
and the staff officers congratulated him, Ku- 
tuzov smiled. 

"Wait a little, gentlemen," said he. "The 
battle is won, and there is nothing extraordi- 
nary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is better 
to wait before we rejoice." 

But he sent an adjutant to take the news 
round the army. 

When Scherbinin came galloping from the 
left flank with news that the French had cap- 
tured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk, 
Kutiizov, guessing by the sounds of the battle 
and by Scherbinin's looks that the news was 
bad, rose as if to stretch his legs and, taking 
Scherbinin's arm, led him aside. 

"Go, my dear fellow," he said to Erm61ov, 
"and see whether something can't be done." 



WAR AND PEACE 

Kutuzov was in G6rki, near the center of the 
Russian position. The attack directed by Na- 
poleon against our left flank had been several 
times repulsed. In the center the French had 
not got beyond Borodin6, and on their left 
flank Uvarov's cavalry had put the French to 
flight. 

Toward three o'clock the French attacks 
ceased. On the faces of all who came from the 
field of battle, and of those who stood around 
him, Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme 
tension. He was satisfied with the day's success 
a success exceeding his expectations, but the 
old man's strength was failing him. Several 
times his head dropped low as if it were falling 
and he dozed off. Dinner was brought him. 

Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who 
when riding past Prince Andrew had said, 
"the war should be extended widely," and 
whom Bagrati6n so detested, rode up while Ku- 
tiizov was at dinner. Wolzogen had come from 
Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of 
affairs on the left flank. The sagacious Barclay 
de Tolly, seeing crowds of wounded men run- 
ning back and the disordered rear of the army, 
weighed all the circumstances, concluded that 
the battle was lost, and sent his favorite officer 
to the commander in chief with that news. 

Kutuzov was chew ing a piece of roast chicken 
with difficulty and glanced at Wolzogen with 
eyes that brightened under their puckering 
lids. 

Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, 
approached Kutuzov with a half-contemptu- 
ous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the 
peak of his cap. 

He treated his Serene Highness with a some- 
what affected nonchalance intended to show 
that, as a highly trained military man, he left 
it to Russians to make an idol of this useless 
old man, but that he knew whom he was deal- 
ing with. "Der alte Herr" (as in their own set 
the Germans called Kutuzov) "is making him- 
self very comfortable," thought Wolzogen, and 
looking severely at the dishes in front of Ku- 
tuzov he began to report to "the old gentle- 
man" the position of affairs on the left flank 
as Barclay had ordered him to and as he him- 
self had seen and understood it. 

"All the points of our position are in the 
enemy's hands and we cannot dislodge them 
for lack of troops, the men are running away 
and it is impossible to stop them," he re- 
ported. 

Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an aston- 
ished gaze on Wolzogen, as if not understand 



ing what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing 
"the old gentleman's" agitation, said with a 
smile: 

"I have not considered it right to conceal 
from your Serene Highness what I have seen. 
The troops are in complete disorder. . . ." 

"You have seen? You have seen? . . ." Kutii- 
zov shouted frowning, and rising quickly he 
went up to Wolzogen. 

"How . . . how dare you! . . ." he shouted, 
choking and making a threatening gesture 
with his trembling arms: "How dare you, sir, 
say that to me? You know nothing about it. 
Tell General Barclay from me that his infor- 
mation is incorrect and that the real course of 
the battle is better known to me, the com- 
mander in chief, than to him." 

Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, 
but Kutuzov interrupted him. 

"The enemy has been repulsed on the left 
and defeated on the right flank. If you have 
seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say 
what you don't know! Be so good as to ride to 
General Barclay and inform him of my firm 
intention to attack the enemy tomorrow," said 
Kutuzov sternly. 

All were silent, and the only sound audible 
was the heavy breathing of the panting old 
general. 

"They are repulsed everywhere, for which I 
thank God and our brave army! The enemy is 
beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from 
the sacred soil of Russia," said Kutuzov cross- 
ing himself, and he suddenly sobbed as his 
eyes filled with tears. 

Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curl- 
ing his lips, stepped silently aside, marveling 
at "the old gentleman's" conceited stupidity. 

"Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a 
portly, handsome, dark-haired general who 
was just ascending the knoll. 

This was Rae!vski, who had spent the whole 
day at the most important part of the field of 
Borodin6. 

Radvski reported that the troops were firmly 
holding their ground and that the French no 
longer ventured to attack. 

After hearing him, Kutuzov said in French: 

"Then you do not think, like some others, 
that we must retreat?" 

"On the contrary, your Highness, in inde- 
cisive actions it is always the most stubborn 
who remain victors," replied Ra^vski, "and in 
my opinion . . ." 

"Kaysdrovl" Kuttizov called to his adjutant. 
"Sit down and write out the order of the day 



BOOK TEN 461 

for tomorrow. And you," he continued, address- 



ing another, "ride along the line and an- 
nounce that tomorrow we attack." 

While Kutuzov was talking to Ravski and 
dictating the order of the day, Wolzogen re- 
turned from Barclay and said that General 
Barclay wished to have written confirmation 
of the order the field marshal had given. 

Kutuzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave 
directions ior the order to be written out 
which the former commander in chief, to avoid 
personal responsibility, very judiciously wished 
to receive. 

And by means of that mysterious indefin- 
able bond which maintains throughout an 
army one and the same temper, known as "the 
spirit of the army," and which constitutes the 
chief sinew of war, Kutuzov's words, his order 
for a battle next day, immediately became 
known from one end of the army to the other. 

It was far from being the same woids or the 
same order that reached the farthest links of 
that chain. The tales passing from mouth to 
mouth at different ends of the army did not 
even resemble what Kutuzov had said, but the 
sense of his words spread everywhere because 
what he said was not the outcome of cunning 
calculations, but of a feeling that lay in the 
commander in chief's soul as in that of every 
Russian. 

And on learning that tomorrow they were to 
attack the enemy, and hearing from the high- 
est quarters a confirmation of what they wanted 
to believe, the exhausted, wavering men felt 
comforted and inspirited. 

CHAPTER XXXVI 

PRINCE ANDREW'S REGIMENT was among the re- 
serves which till after one o'clock were stationed 
inactive behind Semenovsk, under heavy artil- 
lery fire. Toward two o'clock the regiment, 
having already lost more than two hundred 
men, was moved forward into a trampled oat- 
field in the gap between Semenovsk and the 
Knoll Battery, where thousands of men per- 
ished that day and on which an intense, con- 
centrated fire from several hundred enemy 
guns was directed between one and two 
o'clock. 

Without moving from that spot or firing a 
single shot the regiment here lost another 
third of its men. From in front and especially 
from the right, in the unlifting smoke the 
guns boomed, and out of the mysterious do- 
main of smoke that overlay the whole space 
in front, quick hissing cannon balls and slow 



462 

whistling shells flew unceasingly. At times, as 
if to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour 
passed during which the cannon balls and 
shells all flew overhead, but sometimes several 
men were torn from the regiment in a minute 
and the slain were continually being dragged 
away and the wounded carried off. 

With each fresh blow less and less chance 
of life remained for those not yet killed. The 
regiment stood in columns of battalion, three 
hundred paces apart, but nevertheless the 
men were always in one and the same mood. 
All alike were taciturn and morose. Talk was 
rarely heard in the ranks, and it ceased alto- 
gether every time the thud of a successful shot 
and the cry of "stretchers!" was heard. Most of 
the time, by their officers' order, the men sat 
on the ground. One, having taken off his 
shako, carefully loosened the gathers of its lin- 
ing and drew them tight again; another, rub- 
bing some dry clay between his palms, polished 
his bayonet; another fingered the strap and 
pulled the buckle of his bandolier, while an- 
other smoothed and refolded his leg bands 
and put his boots on again. Some built little 
houses of the tufts in the plowed ground, or 
plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield. 
All seemed fully absorbed in these pursuits. 
When men were killed or wounded, when rows 
of stretchers went past, when some troops re- 
treated, and when great masses of the enemy 
came into view through the smoke, no one 
paid any attention to these things. But when 
our artillery or cavalry advanced or some of 
our infantry were seen to move forward, words 
of approval were heard on all sides. But the 
liveliest attention was attracted by occurrences 
quite apart from, and unconnected with, the 
battle. It was as if the minds of these morally 
exhausted men found relief in everyday, com- 
monplace occurrences. A battery of artillery 
was passing in front of the regiment. The 
horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a 
trace. "Hey, look at the trace horse 1 . . . Get 
her leg out! She'll fall. . . . Ah, they don't see 
it!" came identical shouts from the ranks all 
along the regiment. Another time, general at- 
tention was attracted by a small brown dog, 
coming heaven knows whence, which trotted 
in a preoccupied manner in front of the ranks 
with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell 
close by, when it yelped, tucked its tail be- 
tween its legs, and darted aside. Yells and 
shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regi- 
ment. But such distractions lasted only a mo- 
ment, and for eight hours the men had been 



WAR AND PEACE 

inactive, without food, in constant fear of 



death, and their pale and gloomy faces grew 
ever paler and gloomier. 

Prince Andrew, pale and gloomy like every- 
one in the regiment, paced up and down from 
the border of one patch to another, at the edge 
of the meadow beside an oatfield, with head 
bowed and arms behind his back. There was 
nothing for him to do and no orders to be 
given. Everything went on of itself. The killed 
were dragged from the front, the wounded 
carried away, and the ranks closed up. If any 
soldiers ran to the rear they returned immedi- 
ately and hastily. At first Prince Andrew, con- 
sidering it his duty to rouse the courage of the 
men and to set them an example, walked about 
among the ranks, but he soon became con- 
vinced that this was unnecessary and that there 
was nothing he could teach them. All the pow- 
ers of his soul, as of every soldier there, were 
unconsciously bent on avoiding the contem- 
plation of the horrors of their situation. He 
walked along the meadow, dragging his feet, 
rustling the grass, and gazing at the dust that 
covered his boots; now he took big strides try- 
ing to keep to the footprints left on the mead- 
ow by the mowers, then he counted his steps, 
calculating how often he must walk from one 
strip to another to walk a mile, then he stripped 
the flowers from the wormwood that grew a- 
long a boundary rut, rubbed them in his palms, 
and smelled their pungent, sweetly bitter scent. 
Nothing remained of the previous day's 
thoughts. He thought of nothing. He listened 
with weary ears to the ever-recurring sounds, 
distinguishing the whistle of flying projectiles 
from the booming of the reports, glanced at 
the tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the 
first battalion, and waited. "Here it comes . . . 
this one is coming our way again!" he thought, 
listening to an approaching whistle in the hid- 
den region of smoke. "One, another! Again! 
It has hit. . . ." He stopped and looked at the 
ranks. "No, it has gone over. But this one has 
hit!" And again he started trying to reach the 
boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and 
a thud! Five paces from him, a cannon ball 
tore up the dry earth and disappeared. A chill 
ran down his back. Again he glanced at the 
ranks. Probably many had been hit a large 
crowd had gathered near the second battalion. 

"Adjutant!" he shouted. "Order them not 
to crowd together." 

The adjutant, having obeyed this instruc- 
tion, approached Prince Andrew. From the oth- 
er side a battalion commander rode up. 



BOOK TEN 



463 



"Look out I" came a frightened cry from a 
soldier and, like a bird whirring in rapid flight 
and alighting on the ground, a shell dropped 
with little noise within two steps of Prince An- 
drew and close to the battalion commander's 
horse. The horse first, regardless of whether it 
was right or wrong to show fear, snorted, reared 
almost throwing the major, and galloped aside. 
The horse's terror infected the men. 

"Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwing 
himself flat on the ground. 

Prince Andrew hesitated. The smoking shell 
spun like a top between him and the prostrate 
adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the 
field and the meadow. 

"Can this be death?" thought Prince An- 
drew, looking with a quite new, envious glance 
at the grass, the wormwood, and the streamlet 
of smoke that curled up from the rotating 
black ball. "I cannot, I do not wish to die. I 
love life I love this grass, this earth, this 
air. . . ." He thought this, and at the same time 
remembered that people were looking at him. 

"It's shameful, sirl" he said to the adjutant. 
"What . . ." 

He did not finish speaking. At one and the 
same moment came the sound of an explosion, 
a whistle of splinters as from a breaking win- 
dow frame, a suffocating smell of powder, and 
Prince Andrew started to one side, raising his 
arm, and fell on his chest. Several officers ran 
up to him. From the right side of his abdomen, 
blood was welling out making a large stain on 
the grass. 

The militiamen with stretchers who were 
called up stood behind the officers. Prince An- 
drew lay on his chest with his face in the grass, 
breathing heavily and noisily. 

"What are you waiting for? Come alongl" 

The peasants went up and took him by his 
shoulders and legs, but he moaned piteously 
and, exchanging looks, they set him down 
again. 

"Pick him up, lift him, it's all the samel" 
cried someone. 

They again took him by the shoulders and 
laid him on the stretcher. 

"Ah, God! My God! What is it? The stom- 
ach? That means death! My God!" voices 
among the officers were heard saying. 

"It flew a hair's breadth past my ear," said 
the adjutant. 

The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their 
shoulders, started hurriedly along the path 
they had trodden down, to the dressing sta- 
tion. 



"Keep in step! Ah . . . those peasants!" 
shouted an officer, seizing by their shoulder's 
and checking the peasants, who were walking 
unevenly and jolting the stretcher. 

"Get into step, Fedor ... I say, Fedorl" said 
the foremost peasant. 

"Now that's right!" said the one behind joy- 
fully, when he had got into step. 

"Your excellency! Eh, Prince!" said the 
trembling voice of Tim6khin, who had run up 
and was looking down on the stretcher. 

Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked 
up at the speaker from the stretcher into which 
his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids 
drooped. 

The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to 
the dressing station by the wood, where wagons 
were stationed. The dressing station consisted 
of three tents with flaps turned back, pitched 
at the edge of a birch wood. In the wood, wag- 
ons and horses were standing. The horses were 
eating oats from their movable troughs and 
sparrows flew down and peeked the grains that 
fell. Some crows, scenting blood, flew among 
the birch trees cawing impatiently. Around 
the tents, over more than five acres, blood- 
stained men in various garbs stood, sat, or lay. 
Around the wounded stood crowds of soldier 
stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive 
faces, whom the officers keeping order tried in 
vain to drive from the spot. Disregarding the 
officers' orders, the soldiers stood leaning 
against their stretchers and gazing intently, as 
if trying to comprehend the difficult problem 
of what was taking place before them. From 
the tents came now loud angry cries and now 
plaintive groans. Occasionally dressers ran out 
to fetch water, or to point out those who were 
to be brought in next. The wounded men 
awaiting their turn outside the tents groaned, 
sighed, wept, screamed, swore, or asked for 
vodka. Some were delirious. Prince Andrew's 
bearers, stepping over the wounded who had 
not yet been bandaged, took him, as a regi- 
mental commander, close up to one of the tents 
and there stopped, awaiting instructions. 
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and for a long 
time could not make out what was going on 
around him. He remembered the meadow, 
the wormwood, the field, the whirling black 
ball, and his sudden rush of passionate love of 
life. Two steps from him, leaning against a 
branch and talking loudly and attracting gen- 
eral attention, stood a tall, handsome, black- 
haired noncommissioned officer with a ban- 



464 



WAR AND PEACE 



daged head. He had been wounded in the 
head and leg by bullets. Around him, eagerly 
listening to his talk, a crowd of wounded and 
stretcher-bearers was gathered. 

"We kicked him out from there so that 
he chucked everything, we grabbed the King 
himself I" cried he, looking around him 
with eyes that glittered with fever. "If only 
reserves had come up just then, lads, there 
wouldn't have been nothing left of himl I tell 
you surely. . . ." 

Like all the others near the speaker, Prince 
Andrew looked at him with shining eyes and 
experienced a sense of comfort. "But isn't it 
all the same now?" thought he. "And what will 
be there, and what has there been here? Why 
was I so reluctant to part with life? There was 
something in this life I did not and do not 
understand." 

CHAPTER XXXVII 
ONE OF THE DOCTORS came out of the tent in a 
bloodstained apron, holding a cigar between 
the thumb and little finger of one of his small 
bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He 
raised his head and looked about him, but 
above the level of the wounded men. He evi- 
dently wanted a little respite. After turning 
his head from right to left for some time, he 
sighed and looked down. 

"All right, immediately," he replied to a 
dresser who pointed Prince Andrew out to 
him, and he told them to carry him into the 
tent. 

Murmurs arose among the wounded who 
were waiting. 

"It seems that even in the next world only 
the gentry are to have a chance!" remarked 
one. 

Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a 
table that had only just been cleared and which 
a dresser was washing down. Prince Andrew 
could not make out distinctly what was in that 
tent. The pitiful groans from all sides and the 
torturing pain in his thigh, stomach, and back 
distracted him. All he saw about him merged 
into a general impression of naked, bleeding 
human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of 
the low tent, as a few weeks previously, on that 
hot August day, such bodies had filled the 
dirty pond beside the Smolensk road. Yes, it 
was the same flesh, the same chair &amp; canon, the 
sight of which had even then filled him with 
horror, as by a presentiment. 

There were three operating tables in the 
tent. Two were occupied, and on the third 



they placed Prince Andrew, For a little while 
he was left alone and involuntarily witnessed 
what was taking place on the other two tables. 
On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a 
Cossack, judging by the uniform thrown down 
beside him. Four soldiers were holding him, 
and a spectacled doctor was cutting into his 
muscular brown back. 

"Ooh, ooh, oohl" grunted the Tartar, and 
suddenly lifting up his swarthy snub-nosed 
face with its high cheekbones, and baring his 
white teeth, he began to wriggle and twitch 
his body and utter piercing, ringing, and pro- 
longed yells. On the other table, round which 
many people were crowding, a tall well-fed 
man lay on his back with his head thrown 
back. His curly hair, its color, and the shape 
of his head seemed strangely familiar to Prince 
Andrew. Several dressers were pressing on his 
chest to hold him down. One large, white, 
plump leg twitched rapidly all the time with a 
feverish tremor. The man was sobbing and 
choking convulsively. Two doctors one of 
whom was pale and trembling were silently 
doing something to this man's other, gory leg. 
When he had finished with the Tartar, whom 
they covered with an overcoat, the spectacled 
doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wiping his 
hands. 

He glanced at Prince Andrew's face and 
quickly turned away. 

"Undress him! What are you waiting for?" 
he cried angrily to the dressers. 

His very first, remotest recollections of child- 
hood came back to Prince Andrew's mind when 
the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily 
to undo the buttons of his clothes and un- 
dressed him. The doctor bent down over the 
wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. Then he 
made a sign to someone, and the torturing pain 
in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to lose 
consciousness. When he came to himself the 
splintered portions of his thighbone had been 
extracted, the torn flesh cut away, and the 
wound bandaged. Water was being sprinkled 
on his face. As soon as Prince Andrew opened 
his eyes, the doctor bent over, kissed him silent- 
ly on the lips, and hurried away. 

After the sufferings he had been enduring, 
Prince Andrew enjoyed a blissful feeling such 
as he had riot experienced for a long time. All 
the best and happiest moments of his life es 
pecially his earliest childhood, when he used to 
be undressed and put to bed, and when lean- 
ing over him his nurse sang him to sleep and 
he, burying his head in the pillow, felt happy 



BOOK 

in the mere consciousness of life returned to 
his memory, not merely as something past but 
as something present. 

The doctors were busily engaged with the 
wounded man the shape of whose head seemed 
familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting 
him up and trying to quiet him. 

"Show it to me Oh,ooh . . . Ohl Oh,oohl" 

his frightened moans could be heard, subdued 
by suffering and broken by sobs. 

Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted 
to weep. Whether because he was dying with- 
out glory, or because he was sorry to part with 
life, or because of those memories of a child- 
hood that could not return, or because he was 
suffering and others were suffering and that 
man near him was groaning so piteously he 
felt like weeping childlike, kindly, and al- 
most happy tears. 

The wounded man was shown his amputat- 
ed leg stained with clotted blood and with the 
boot still on. 

"Oh! Oh, oohl" he sobbed, like a woman. 

The doctor who had been standing beside 
him, preventing Prince Andrew from seeing 
his face, moved away. 

"My Godl What is this? Why is he here?" 
said Prince Andrew to himself. 

In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man 
whose leg had just been amputated, he recog- 
nized Anatole Kuragin. Men were supporting 
him in their arms and offering him a glass of 
water, but his trembling, swollen lips could 
not grasp its rim. Anatole was sobbing pain- 
fully. "Yes, it is he! Yes, that man is somehow 
closely and painfully connected with me," 
thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly grasp- 
ing what he saw before him. "What is the con- 
nection of that man with my childhood and my 
life?" he asked himself without finding an an- 
swer. And suddenly a new unexpected memory 
from that realm of pure and loving childhood 
presented itself to him. He remembered Na- 
tasha as he had seen her for the first time at the 
ball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms and 
with a frightened happy face ready for rapture, 
and love and tenderness for her, stronger and 
more vivid than ever, awoke in his soul. He 
now remembered the connection that existed 
between himself and this man who was dimly 
gazing at him through tears that filled his swol- 
len eyes. He remembered everything, and ec- 
static pity and love for that man overflowed 
his happy heart. 

Prince Andrew could no longer restrain him- 
self and wept tender loving tears for his fel- 



TEN 465 

low men, for himself, and for his own and 
their errors. 

"Compassion, love of our brothers, for those 
who love us and for those who hate us, love of 
our enemies; yes, that love which God preached 
on earth and which Princess Mary taught me 
and I did not understand that is what made 
me sorry to part with life, that is what re- 
mained for me had I lived. But now it is too 
late. I know it 1" 

CHAPTER XXXVIII 
THE TERRIBLE SPECTACLE of the battlefield cov- 
ered with dead and wounded, together with 
the heaviness of his head and the news that 
some twenty generals he knew personally had 
been killed or wounded, and the consciousness 
of the impotence of his once mighty arm, pro- 
duced an unexpected impression on Napoleon 
who usually liked to look at the killed and 
wounded, thereby, he considered, testing his 
strength of mind. This day the horrible ap- 
pearance of the battlefield overcame that 
strength of mind which he thought constitut- 
ed his merit and his greatness. He rode hurried- 
ly from the battlefield and returned to the She- 
vardino knoll, where he sat on his campstool, 
his sallow face swollen and heavy, his eyes dim, 
his nose red, and his voice hoarse, involunta- 
rily listening, with downcast eyes, to the sounds 
of firing. With painful dejection he awaited 
the end of this action, in which he regarded 
himself as a participant and which he was un- 
able to arrest. A personal, human feeling for 
a brief moment got the better of the artificial 
phantasm of life he had served so long. He 
felt in his own person the sufferings and death 
he had witnessed on the battlefield. The heavi- 
ness of his head and chest reminded him of the 
possibility of suffering and death for himself. 
At that moment he did not desire Moscow, or 
victory, or glory (what need had he for any 
more glory?). The one thing he wished for was 
rest, tranquillity, and freedom. But when he 
had been on the Semenovsk heights the artil- 
lery commander had proposed to him to bring 
several batteries of artillery up to those heights 
to strengthen the fire on the Russian troops 
crowded in front of Knyazkovo. Napoleon had 
assented and had given orders that news should 
be brought him of the effect those batteries 
produced. 

An adjutant came now to inform him that 
the fire of two hundred guns had been concen- 
trated on the Russians, as he had ordered, but 
that they still held their ground. 



466 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Our fire is mowing them down by rows, but 
still they hold on," said the adjutant 

"They want more! . . ." said Napoleon in a 
hoarse voice. 

"Sire?" asked the adjutant who had not heard 
the remark. 

"They want more!" croaked Napoleon 
frowning. "Let them have it!" 

Even before he gave that order the thing he 
did not desire, and for which he gave the order 
only because he thought it was expected of 
him, was being done. And he fell back into 
that artificial realmof imaginary greatness, and 
againas a horse walking a treadmill thinks 
it is doing something for itself he submissive- 
ly fulfilled the cruel, sad, gloomy, and inhuman 
role predestined for him. 

And not for that day and hour alone were the 
mind and conscience darkened of this man on 
whom the responsibility for what was happen- 
ing lay more than on all the others who took 
part in it. Never to the end of his life could he 
understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or the 
significance of his actions which were too con- 
trary to goodness and truth, too remote from 
everything human, for him ever to be able to 
grasp their meaning. He could not disavow his 
actions, belauded as they were by half the world, 
and so he had to repudiate truth, goodness, and 
all humanity. 

Not only on that day, as he rode over the 
battlefield strewn with men killed and maimed 
(by his will as he believed), did he reckon as 
he looked at them how many Russians there 
were for each Frenchman and, deceiving him- 
self, find reason for rejoicing in the calculation 
that there were five Russians for every French- 
man. Not on that day alone did he write in a 
letter to Paris that "the battlefield was superb," 
because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but 
even on the island of St. Helena in the peace- 
ful solitude where he said he intended to de- 
vote his leisure to an account of the great deeds 
he had done, he wrote: 

The Russian war should have been the most 
popular war of modern times: it was a war of good 
sense, for real interests, for the tranquillity and 
security of all; it was purely pacific and conserva- 
tive. 

It was a war for a great cause, the end of un- 
certainties and the beginning of security. A new 
horizon and new labors were opening out, full of 
well-being and prosperity for all. The European 
system was already founded; all that remained 
was to organize it. 

Satisfied on these great points and with tran- 
quillity everywhere, I too should have had my 



Congress and my Holy Alliance. Those ideas were 
stolen from me. In that reunion of great sovereigns 
we should have discussed our interests like one 
family, and have rendered account to the peoples 
as clerk to master. 

Europe would in this way soon have been, in 
fact, but one people, and anyone who traveled 
anywhere would have found himself always in the 
common fatherland. I should have demanded the 
freedom of all navigable rivers for everybody, that 
the seas should be common to all, and that the 
great standing armies should be reduced hence- 
forth to mere guards for the sovereigns. 

On returning to France, to the bosom of the 
great, strong, magnificent, peaceful, and glorious 
fatherland, I should have proclaimed her frontiers 
immutable; all future wars purely defensive, all 
aggrandizement antinational. I should have as- 
sociated my son in the Empire; my dictatorship 
would have been finished, and his constitutional 
reign would have begun. 

Paris would have been the capital of the world, 
and the French the envy of the nations! 

My leisure then, and my old age, would have 
been devoted, in company with the Empress and 
during the royal apprenticeship of my son, to 
leisurely visiting, with our own horses and like a 
true country couple, every corner of the Empire, 
receiving complaints, redressing wrongs, and scat- 
tering public buildings and benefactions on all 
sides and everywhere. 

Napoleon, predestined by Providence for 
the gloomy role of executioner of the peo- 
ples, assured himself that the aim of his actions 
had been the peoples' welfare and that he 
could control the fate of millions and by the 
employment of power confer benefactions. 

"Of four hundred thousand men who crossed the 
Vistula," he wrote further of the Russian war, 
"half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles, Ba- 
varians, Wurttembergers, Mecklenburgers, Span- 
iards, Italians, and Neapolitans. The Imperial ar- 
my, strictly speaking, was one third composed of 
Dutch, Belgians, men from the borders of the 
Rhine, Piedmontese, Swiss, Genevese, Tuscans, Ro- 
mans, inhabitants of the Thirty-second Military 
Division, of Bremen, of Hamburg, and so on: it 
included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand 
who spoke French. The Russian expedition actual- 
ly cost France less than fifty thousand men; the 
Russian army in its retreat from Vttna to Moscow 
lost in the various battles four times more men 
than the French army; the burning of Moscow cost 
the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died 
of cold and want in the woods; finally, in its march 
from Moscow to the Oder the Russian army also 
suffered from the severity of the season; so that 
by the the time it reached Vilna it numbered only 
fifty thousand, and at Kalisch less than eighteen 
thousand." 



BOOK TEN 



467 



He imagined that the war with Russia came 
about by his will, and the horrors that occurred 
did not stagger his soul. He boldly took the 
whole responsibility for what happened, and 
his darkened mind found justification in the 
belief that among the hundreds of thousands 
who perished there were fewer Frenchmen 
than Hessians and Bavarians. 

CHAPTER XXXIX 

SEVERAL TENS OF THOUSANDS of the slain lay in 
diverse postures and various uniforms on the 
fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov 
family and to the crown serfs those fields and 
meadows where for hundreds of years the 
peasants of Borodin6, G6rki, Shevardino, and 
Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pas- 
tured their cattle. At the dressing stations the 
grass and earth were soaked with blood for a 
space of some three acres around. Crowds of 
men of various arms, wounded and unwound- 
ed, with frightened faces, dragged themselves 
back to Mozhaysk from the one army and back 
to Valiievo from the other. Other crowds, ex- 
hausted and hungry, went forward led by their 
officers. Others held their ground and contin- 
ued to fire. 

Over the whole field, previously so gaily 
beautiful with the glitter of bayonets and cloud- 
lets of smoke in the morning sun, there now 
spread a mist of damp and smoke and a strange 
acid smell of saltpeter and blood. Clouds gath- 
ered and drops of rain began to fall on the dead 
and wounded, on the frightened, exhausted, 
and hesitating men, as if to say: "Enough, menl 
Enough! Cease . . . bethink yourselvesl What 
are you doing?" 

To the men of both sides alike, worn out by 
want of food and rest, it began equally to ap- 
pear doubtful whether they should continue 
to slaughter one another; all the faces ex- 
pressed hesitation, and the question arose in 
every soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill 
and be killed? . . . You may go and kill whom 
you please, but I don't want to do so any more I" 
By evening this thought had ripened in every 
soul. At any moment these men might have 
been seized with horror at what they were do- 
ing and might have thrown up everything and 
run away anywhere. 

But though toward the end of the battle the 
men felt all the horror of what they were do- 
ing, though they would have been glad to 
leave off, some incomprehensible, mysterious 
power continued to control them, and they 
still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, 



and applied the match, though only one artil- 
leryman survived out of every three, and 
though they stumbled and panted with fatigue, 
perspiring and stained with blood and pow- 
der. The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and 
cruelly from both sides, crushing human bod- 
ies, and that terrible work which was not done 
by the will of a man but at the will of Him 
who governs men and worlds continued. 

Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of 
the Russian army would have said that, if only 
the French made one more slight effort, it 
would disappear; and anyone looking at the 
rear of the French army would have said that 
the Russians need only make one more slight 
effort and the French would be destroyed. But 
neither the French nor the Russians made that 
effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly 
out. 

The Russians did not make that effort be- 
cause they were not attacking the French. At 
the beginning of the battle theystood blocking 
the way to Moscow and they still did so at the 
end of the battle as at the beginning. But even 
had the aim of the Russians been to drive the 
French from their positions, they could not 
have made this last effort, for all the Russian 
troops had been broken up, there was no part 
of the Russian army that had not suffered in 
the battle, and though still holding their 
positions they had lost ONE HALF of their 
army. 

The French, with the memory of all their 
former victories during fifteen years, with the 
assurance of Napoleon's invincibility, with 
the consciousness that they had captured part 
of the battlefield and had lost only a quarter 
of their men and still had their Guards intact, 
twenty thousand strong, might easily have 
made that effort. The French who had attacked 
the Russian army in order to drive it from its 
position ought to have made that effort, for 
as long as the Russians continued to block the 
road to Moscow as before, the aim of the 
French had not been attained and all their 
efforts and losses were in vain. But the French 
did not make that effort. Some historians say 
that Napoleon need only have used his Old 
Guards, who were intact, and the battle would 
have been won. To speak of what would have 
happened had Napoleon sent his Guards is 
like talking of what would happen if autumn 
became spring. It could not be. Napoleon did 
not give his Guards, not because he did not 
want to, but because it could not be done. All 
the generals, officers, and soldiers of the French 



4 68 



WAR AND PEACE 



army knew it could not be done, because the 
flagging spirit of the troops would not permit 
it. 

It was not Napoleon alone who had experi- 
enced that nightmare feeling of the mighty 
arm being stricken powerless, but all the gen- 
erals and soldiers of his army whether they 
had taken part in the battle or not, after all 
their experience of previous battles when aft- 
er one tenth of such efforts the enemy had fled 
experienced a similar feeling of terror before 
an enemy who, after losing HALF his men, stood 
as threateningly at the end as at the beginning 
of the battle. The moral force of the attacking 
French army was exhausted. Not that sort of 
victory which is defined by the capture of pieces 
of material fastened to sticks, called standards, 
and of the ground on which the troops had 
stood and were standing, but a moral victory 
that convinces the enemy of the moral superi- 



ority of his opponent and of his own impotence 
was gained by the Russians at Borodin6. The 
French invaders, like an infuriated animal that 
has in its onslaught received a mortal wound, 
felt that they were perishing, but could not 
stop, any more than the Russian army, weak- 
er by one half, could help swerving. By the im- 
petus gained, the French army was still able to 
roll forward to Moscow, but there, without 
further effort on the part of the Russians, it 
had to perish, bleeding from the mortal wound 
it had received at Borodin6. The direct conse- 
quence of the battle of Borodino was Napo- 
leon's senseless flight from Moscow, his retreat 
along the old Smolensk road, the destruction 
of the invading army of five hundred thousand 
men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, 
on which at Borodino for the first time the 
hand of an opponent of stronger spirit had 
been laid. 



Book Eleven: 1812 



CHAPTER I 

ABSOLUTE CONTINUITY of motion is not compre- 
hensible to the human mind. Laws of motion 
of any kind become comprehensible to man 
only when he examines arbitrarily selected el- 
ements of that motion; but at the same time, 
a large proportion of human error comes from 
the arbitrary division of continuous motion 
into discontinuous elements. There is a well- 
known, so-called sophism of the ancients con- 
sisting in this, that Achilles could never catch 
up with a tortoise he was following, in spite of 
the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the 
tortoise. By the time Achilles has covered the 
distance that separated him from the tortoise, 
the tortoise has covered one tenth of that dis- 
tance ahead of him: when Achilles has covered 
that tenth, the tortoise has covered another one 
hundredth, and so on forever. This problem 
seemed to the ancients insoluble. The absurd 
answer (that Achilles could never overtake the 
tortoise) resulted from this: that motion was 
arbitrarily divided into discontinuous ele- 
ments, whereas the motion both of Achilles 
and of the tortoise was continuous. 

By adopting smaller and smaller elements of 
motion we only approach a solution of the 
problem, but never reach it. Only when we 
have admitted the conception of the infinite- 
ly small, and the resulting geometrical pro- 
gression with a common ratio of one tenth, 
and have found the sum of this progression 
to infinity, do we reach a solution of the prob- 
lem. 

A modern branch of mathematics having 
achieved the art of dealing with the infinitely 
small can now yield solutions in other more 
complex problems of motion which used to 
appear insoluble. 

This modern branch of mathematics, un- 
known to the ancients, when dealing with 
problems of motion admits the conception of 
the infinitely small, and so conforms to the 
chief condition of motion (absolute continui- 
ty) and thereby corrects the inevitable error 



which the human mind cannot avoid when 
it deals with separate elements of motion in- 
stead of examining continuous motion. 

In seeking the laws of historical movement 
just the same thing happens. The movement of 
humanity, arising as it does from innumerable 
arbitrary human wills, is continuous. 

To understand the laws of this continuous 
movement is the aim of history. But to arrive 
at these laws, resulting from the sum of all those 
human wills, man's mind postulates arbitrary 
and disconnected units. The first method of 
history is to take an arbitrarily selected series 
of continuous events and examine it apart 
from others, though there is and can be no be- 
ginning to any event, for one event always 
flows uninterruptedly from another. 

The second method is to consider the ac- 
tions of some one man a king or a command- 
eras equivalent to the sum of many individ- 
ual wills; whereas the sum of individual wills 
is never expressed by the activity of a single his- 
toric personage. 

Historical science in its endeavor to draw 
nearer to truth continually takes smaller and 
smaller units for examination. But however 
small the units it takes, we feel that to take 
any unit disconnected from others, or to as- 
sume a beginning of any phenomenon, or to 
say that the will of many men is expressed by 
the actions of any one historic personage, is in 
itself false. 

It needs no critical exertion to reduce utter- 
ly to dust any deductions drawn from history. 
It is merely necessary to select some larger or 
smaller unit as the subject of observation as 
criticism has every right to do, seeing that 
whatever unit history observes must always be 
arbitrarily selected. 

Only by taking infinitesimally small units 
for observation (the differential of history, 
that is, the individual tendencies of men) and 
attaining to the art of integrating them (that 
is, finding the sum of these infinitesimals) can 
we hope to arrive at the laws of history. 



469 



470 



The first fifteen years of the nineteenth cen- 
tury in Europe present an extraordinary move- 
ment of millions of people. Men leave their 
customary pursuits, hasten from one side of 
Europe to the other, plunder and slaughter 
one another, triumph and are plunged in de- 
spair, and for some years the whole course of 
life is altered and presents an intensive move- 
ment which first increases and then slackens. 
What was the cause of this movement, by what 
laws was it governed? asks the mind of man. 

The historians, replying to this question, lay 
before us the sayings and doings of a few dozen 
men in a building in the city of Paris, calling 
these sayings and doings "the Revolution"; 
then they give a detailed biography of Napo- 
leon and of certain people favorable or hostile 
to him; tell of the influence some of these peo- 
ple had on others, and say: that is why this 
movement took place and those are its laws. 

But the mind of man not only refuses to be- 
lieve this explanation, but plainly says that 
this method of explanation is fallacious, be- 
cause in it a weaker phenomenon is taken as 
the cause of a stronger. The sum of human 
wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, 
and only the sum of those wills first tolerated 
and then destroyed them. 

"But every time there have been conquests 
there have been conquerors; every time there 
has been a revolution in any state there have 
been great men," says history. And, indeed, hu- 
man reason replies: every time conquerors ap- 
pear there have been wars, but this does not 
prove that the conquerors caused the wars and 
that it is possible to find the laws of a war in 
the personal activity of a single man. When- 
ever I look at my watch and its hands point to 
ten, I hear the bells of the neighbor ing church; 
but because the bells begin to ring when the 
hands of the clock reach ten, I have no right to 
assume that the movement of the bells is caused 
by the position of the hands of the watch. 

Whenever I see the movement of a locomo- 
tive I hear the whistle and see the valves open- 
ing and wheels turning; but I have no right to 
conclude that the whistling and the turning of 
wheels are the cause of the movement of the 
engine. 

The peasants say that a cold wind blows in 
late spring because the oaks are budding, and 
really every spring cold winds do blow when 
the oak is budding. But though I do not know 
what causes the cold winds to blow when the 
oak buds unfold, I cannot agree with the peas- 
ants that the unfolding of the oak buds is the 



WAR AND PEACE 

cause of the cold wind, for the force of the 
wind is beyond the influence of the buds. I see 
only a coincidence of occurrences such as hap- 
pens with all the phenomena of life, and I see 
that however much and however carefully I 
observe the hands of the watch, and the valves 
and wheels of the engine, and the oak, I shall 
not discover the cause of the bells ringing, the 
engine moving, or of the winds of spring. Todo 
that I must entirely change my point of view 
and study the laws of the movement of steam, 
of the bells, and of the wind. History must do 
the same. And attempts in this direction have 
already been made. 

To study the laws of history we must com- 
pletely change the subject of our observation, 
must leave aside kings, ministers, and generals, 
and study the common, infmitcsimally small 
elements by which the masses are moved. No 
one can say in how far it is possible for man to 
advance in this way toward an understanding 
of the laws of history; but it is evident that on- 
ly along that path does the possibility of discov- 
ering the laws of history lie, and that as yet 
not a millionth part as much mental effort has 
been applied in this direction by historians as 
has been devoted to describing the actions of 
various kings, commanders, and ministers and 
propounding the historians' own reflections 
concerning these actions. 



CHAPTER II 

THE FORCES of a dozen European nations burst 
into Russia. The Russian army and people 
avoided a collision till Smolensk was reached, 
and again from Smolensk to Borodin6. The 
French army pushed on to Moscow, its goal, its 
impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim, 
just as the velocity of a falling body increases 
as it approaches the earth. Behind it were sev- 
en hundred miles of hunger-stricken, hostile 
country; ahead were a few dozen miles sepa- 
rating it from its goal. Every soldier in Napo- 
leon's army felt this and the invasion moved 
on by its own momentum. 

The more the Russian army retreated the 
more fiercely a spirit of hatred of the enemy 
flared up, and while it retreated the army in- 
creased and consolidated. At Borodin6 a col- 
lision took place. Neither army was broken 
up, but the Russian army retreated immediate- 
ly after the collision as inevitably as a ball re- 
coils after colliding with another having a 
greater momentum, and with equal inevitabil- 
ity the ball of invasion that had advanced with 
such momentum rolled on for some distance, 



BOOK ELEVEN 



47 1 



though the collision had deprived it of all its 
force. 

The Russians retreated eighty milesto be- 
yond Moscowand the French reached Mos- 
cow and there came to a standstill. For five 
weeks after that there was not a single battle. 
The French did not move. As a bleeding, mor- 
tally wounded animal licks its wounds, they 
remained inert in Moscow for five weeks, and 
then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back: 
they made a dash for the Kaluga road, and 
(after a victory for at Malo-Yaroslavets the 
field of conflict again remained theirs) without 
undertaking a single serious battle, they fled 
still more rapidly back to Smolensk, beyond 
Smolensk, beyond the Berezina, beyond Vilna, 
and farther still. 

On the eveningof the twenty-sixth of August, 
Kutuzov and the whole Russian army were con- 
vinced that the battle of Borodino was a victory. 
Kutuzov reported so to the Emperor. He gave 
orders to prepare for a fresh conflict to finish 
the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone, 
but because he knew that the enemy was beat- 
en, as everyone who had taken part in the bat- 
tle knew it. 

But all that evening and next day reports 
came in one after another of unheard-of losses, 
of the loss of half the army, and a fresh battle 
proved physically impossible. 

It was impossible to give battle before infor- 
mation had been collected, the wounded gath- 
ered in, the supplies of ammunition replen- 
ished, the slain reckoned up, new officers ap- 
pointed to replace those who had been killed, 
and before the men had had food and sleep. 
And meanwhile, the very next morning after 
the battle, the French army advanced of itself 
upon the Russians, carried forward by the 
force of its own momentum now seemingly in- 
creased in inverse proportion to the square of 
the distance from its aim. Kutuzov's wish was 
to attack next day, and the whole army desired 
to do so. But to make an attack the wish to do 
so is not sufficient, there must also be a possi- 
bility of doing it, and that possibility did not 
exist. It was impossible not to retreat a day's 
march, and then in the same way it was impos- 
sible not to retreat another and a third day's 
march, and at last, on the first of September 
when the army drew near Moscow despite the 
strength of the feeling that had arisen in all 
ranks the force of circumstances compelled it 
to retire beyond Moscow. And the troops re- 
tired one more, last, day's march, and aban- 
doned Moscow to the enemy. 



For people accustomed to think that plans 
of campaign and battles are made by generals 
as any one of us sitting over a map in his 
study may imagine how he would have ar- 
ranged things in this or that battle the ques- 
tions present themselves: Why did Kutuzov 
during the retreat not do this or that? Why did 
he not take up a position before reaching Fill? 
Why did he not retire at once by the Kaluga 
road, abandoning Moscow? and so on. People 
accustomed to think in that way forget, or do 
not know, the inevitable conditions which al- 
ways limit the activities of any commander in 
chief. The activity of a commander in chief 
does not at all resemble the activity we imagine 
to ourselves when we sit at ease in our studies 
examining some campaign on the map, with 
a certain number of troops on this and that 
side in a certain known locality, and begin our 
plans from some given moment. A commander 
in chief is never dealing with the beginning of 
any event the position from which we always 
contemplate it. The commander in chief is 
always in the midst of a series of shifting events 
and so he never can at any moment consider 
the whole import of an event that is occurring. 
Moment by moment the event is imperceptibly 
shaping itself, and at every moment of thiscon- 
tinuous, uninterrupted shaping of events the 
commander in chief is in the midst of a most 
complex play of intrigues, worries, contingen- 
cies, authorities, projects, counsels, threats, and 
deceptions and is continually obliged to reply 
to innumerable questions addressed to him, 
which constantly conflict with one another. 

Learned military authorities quite seriously 
tell us that Kutuzov should have moved his ar- 
my to the Kaluga road long before reaching 
FiH, and that somebody actually submitted 
such a proposal to him. But a commander in 
chief, especially at a difficult moment, has al- 
ways before him not one proposal but dozens 
simultaneously. And all these proposals, based 
on strategics and tactics, contradict each other. 

A commander in chiefs business, it would 
seem, is simply to choose one of these projects. 
But even that he cannot do. Events and time 
do not wait. For instance, on the twenty-eighth 
it is suggested to him to cross to the Kaluga 
road, but just then an adjutant gallops up from 
Milorddovich asking whether he is to engage 
the French or retire. An order must be given 
him at once, that instant. And the order to re- 
treat carries us past the turn to the Kaluga 
road. And after the adjutant comes the com- 
missary general asking where the stores are to 



47* 



WAR AND PEACE 



be taken, and the chief of the hospitals asks 
where the wounded are to go, and a courier 
from Petersburg brings a letter from the sov- 
ereign which does not admit of the possibility 
of abandoning Moscow, and the commander 
in chief's rival, the man who is undermining 
him (and there are always not merely one but 
several such), presents a new project diametri- 
cally opposed to that of turning to the Kaluga 
road, and the commander in chief himself 
needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his 
energy, and a respectable general who has 
been overlooked in the distribution of rewards 
comes to complain, and the inhabitants of the 
district pray to be defended, and an officer sent 
to inspect the locality comes in and gives a re- 
port quite contrary to what was said by the 
officer previously sent; and a spy, a prisoner, 
and a general who has been on reconnaissance, 
all describe the position of the enemy's army 
differently. People accustomed to misunder- 
stand or to forget these inevitable conditions 
of a commander in chiefs actions describe to 
us, for instance, the position of the army at 
Fill and assume that the commander in chief 
could, on the first of September, quite freely 
decide whether to abandon Moscow or defend 
it; whereas, with the Russian army less than 
four miles from Moscow, no such question 
existed. When had that question been settled? 
At Drissa and at Smolensk and most palpably 
of all on the twenty-fourth of August at She- 
vardino and on the twenty-sixth at liorodino, 
and each day and hour and minute of the 
retreat from Borodin6 to Fill. 

CHAPTER III 

WHEN ERMOLOV, having been sent by Kutuzov 
to inspect the position, told the field marshal 
that it was impossible to fight there before 
Moscow and that they must retreat, Kutuzov 
looked at him in silence. 

"Give me your hand," said he and, turning 
it over so as to feel the pulse, added: "You are 
not well, my dear fellow. Think what you are 
saying!" 

Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility 
of retreating beyond Moscow without a battle. 

On the Poklonny Hill, four miles from the 
Dorogomilov gate of Moscow, Kutuzov got out 
of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the 
roadside. A great crowd of generals gathered 
round him, and Count Rostopchin, who had 
come out from Moscow, joined them. This 
brilliant company separated into several 
groups who all discussed the advantages and 



disadvantages of the position, the state of the 
army, the plans suggested, the situation of 
Moscow, and military questions generally. 
Though they had not been summoned for the 
purpose, and though it was not so called, they 
all felt that this was really a council of war. 
The conversations all dealt with public ques- 
tions. If anyone gave or asked for personal 
news, it was done in a whisper and they im- 
mediately reverted to general matters. No jokes, 
or laughter, or smiles even, were seen among 
all these men. They evidently all made an ef- 
fort to hold themselves at the height the situa- 
tion demanded. And all these groups, while 
talking among themselves, tried to keep near 
the commander in chief (whose bench formed 
the center of the gathering) and to speak so 
that he might overhear them. The commander 
in chief listened to what was being said and 
sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks, 
but did not himself take part in the conversa- 
tions or express any opinion. After hearing 
what was being said by one or other of these 
groups he generally turned away with an air 
of disappointment, as though they were not 
speaking of anything he wished to hear. Some 
discussed the position that had been chosen, 
criticizing not the position itself so much as 
the mental capacity of those who had chosen 
it. Others argued that a mistake had been made 
earlier and that a battle should have been 
fought two days before. Others again spoke of 
the battle of Salamanca, which was described 
by Crosart, a newly arrived Frenchman in a 
Spanish uniform. (This Frenchman and one 
of the German princes serving with the Rus- 
sian army were discussing the siege of Sara- 
gossaand considering the possibility of defend- 
ing Moscow in a similar manner.) Count Ros- 
topchin was telling a fourth group that he was 
prepared to die with the city train bands under 
the walls of the capital, but that he still could 
not help regretting having been left in igno- 
rance of what was happening, and that had he 
known it sooner things would have been dif- 
ferent. ... A fifth group, displaying the pro- 
fundity of their strategic perceptions, discussed 
the direction the troops would now have to 
take. A sixth group was talking absolute non- 
sense. Kutiizov's expression grew more and 
more preoccupied and gloomy. From all this 
talk he sawonly one thing: that to defend Mos- 
cow was a physical impossibility in the full 
meaning of those words, that is to say, so ut- 
terly impossible that if any senseless command- 
er were to give orders to fight, confusion would 



result but the battle would still not take place. 
It would not take place because the command- 
ers not merely all recognized the position to be 
impossible, but in their conversations were 
only discussing what would happen after its 
inevitable abandonment. How could the com- 
manders lead their troops to a field of battle 
they considered it impossible to hold? The 
lower-grade officers and even the soldiers (who 
too reason) also considered the position im- 
possible and therefore could not go to fight, 
fully convinced as they were of defeat. If Ben- 
nigsen insisted on the position being defended 
and others still discussed it, the question was 
no longer important in itself but only as a pre- 
text for disputes and intrigue. This Kutuzov 
knew well. 

Bennigsen, who had chosen the position, 
warmly displayed his Russian patriotism (Ku- 
tuzov could not listen to this without wincing) 
by insisting that Moscow must be defended. 
His aim was as clear as daylight to Kutuzov: if 
the defense failed, to throw the blame on Ku- 
tuzov who had brought the army as far as the 
Sparrow Hills without giving battle; if it suc- 
ceeded, to claim the success as his own; or if 
battle were not given, to clear himself of the 
crime of abandoning Moscow. But this intrigue 
did not now occupy the old man's mind. One 
terrible question absorbed him and to that 
question he heard no reply from anyone. The 
question for him now was: "Have I really al- 
lowed Napoleon to reach Moscow, and when 
did I do so? When was it decided? Can it have 
been yesterday when I ordered Platov to retreat, 
or was it the evening before, when I had a nap 
and told Bennigsen to issue orders? Or was it 
earlier still? . . . When, when was this terrible 
affair decided? Moscow must be abandoned. 
The army must retreat and the order to do so 
must be given." To give that terrible order 
seemed to him equivalent to resign ing the com- 
mand of the army. And not only did he love 
power to which he was accustomed (the hon- 
ours awarded to Prince Prozorovski, under 
whom he had served in Turkey, galled him), 
but he was convinced that he was destined to 
save Russia and that that was why, against the 
Emperor's wish and by the will of the people, 
he had been chosen commander in chief. He 
was convinced that he alone could maintain 
command of the army in these difficult cir- 
cumstances, and that in all the world he alone 
could encounter the invincible Napoleon with- 
out fear, and he was horrified at the thought of 
the order he had to issue. But something had 



BOOK ELEVEN 473 

to be decided, and these conversations around 
him which were assuming too free a character 
must be stopped. 

He called the most important generals to 
him. 

"My head, be it good or bad, must depend 
on itself," said he, rising from the bench, and 
he rode to Fill where his carriages were wait- 
ing. 



CHAPTER IV 

THE COUNCIL OF WAR began to assemble at 
two in the afternoon in the better and roomier 
part of Andrew Savostyanov's hut. The men, 
women, and children of the large peasant fam- 
ily crowded into the back room across the pas- 
sage. Only MaLisha, Andrew's six-yearold 
granddaughter whom his Serene Highness had 
petted and to whom he had given a lump of 
sugar while drinking his tea, remained on the 
top of the brick oven in the larger room. Ma- 
lasha looked down from the oven with shy de- 
light at the faces, uniforms, and decorations 
of the generals, who one after another came 
into the room and sat clown on the broad 
benches in the corner under the icons. "Grand- 
dad" himself, as Malasha in her own mind 
called Kutuzov, sat apart in a dark corner be- 
hind the oven. lie sat, sunk deep in a folding 
armchair, and continually cleared his throat 
and pulled at the collar of his coat which, 
though it was unbuttoned, still seemed to 
pinch his neck. Those who entered went up 
one by one to the field marshal; he pressed the 
hands of some and nodded to others. His ad- 
jutant Kaysarov was about to draw back the 
curtain of the window facing Kutuzov, but the 
latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysdrov 
understood that his Serene Highness did not 
wish his face to be seen. 

Round the peasant's deal table, on which lay 
maps, plans, pencils, and papers, so many peo- 
ple gathered that the orderlies brought in an- 
other bench and put it beside the table. Erm6- 
lov, Kaysdrov, and Toll, who had just arrived, 
sat down on this bench. In the foremost place, 
immediately under the icons, sat Barclay de 
Tolly, his high forehead merging into his bald 
crown. He had a St. George's Cross round his 
neck and looked pale and ill. He had been 
feverish for two days and was now shivering 
and in pain. Beside him sat Uvdrov, who with 
rapid gesticulations was giving him some in- 
formation, speaking in low tones as they all 
did. Chubby little Dokhtiirov was listening at- 
tentively with eyebrows raised and arms fold- 



474 



WAR AND PEACE 



ed on his stomach. On the other side sat Count 
Ostermann-Tolst6y, seemingly absorbed in his 
own thoughts. His broad head with its bold 
features and glittering eyes was resting on his 
hand. Ravski, twitching forward the black 
hair on his temples as was his habit, glanced 
now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a 
look of impatience. Konovnitsyn's firm, hand- 
some, and kindly face was lit up by a tender, 
sly smile. His glance met Maldsha's, and the 
expression of his eyes caused the little girl to 
smile. 

They were all waiting for Bennigsen, who 
on the pretext of inspecting the position was 
finishing his savory dinner. They waited for 
him from four till six o'clock and did not be- 
gin their deliberations all that time but talked 
in low tones of other matters. 

Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut 
did Kutuzov leave his corner and draw toward 
the table, but not near enough for the candles 
that had been placed there to light up his face. 

Bennigsen opened the council with the ques- 
tion: "Are we to abandon Russia's ancient and 
sacred capital without a struggle, or are we to 
defend it?" A prolonged and general silence 
followed. There was a frown on every face and 
only Kutuzov's angry grunts and occasional 
cough broke the silence. All eyes were gazing 
at him. Mal&amp;sha too looked at "Granddad." 
She was nearest to him and saw how his face 
puckered; he seemed about to cry, but this did 
not last long. 

"Russia's ancient and sacred capital!" he 
suddenly said, repeating Bennigsen's words in 
an angry voice and thereby drawing attention 
to the false note in them. "Allow me to tell you, 
your excellency, that that question has no 
meaning fora Russian." (He lurched hisheavy 
body forward.) "Such a question cannot be 
put; it is senseless! The question I have asked 
these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military 
one. The question is that of saving Russia. Is 
it better to give up Moscow without a battle, 
or by accepting battle to risk losing the army 
as well as Moscow? That is the question on 
which I want your opinion," and he sank back 
in his chair. 

The discussion began. Bennigsen did not 
yet consider his game lost. Admitting the view 
of Barclay and others that a defensive battle 
at Fili was impossible, but imbued with Rus- 
sian patriotism and the love of Moscow, he 
proposed to move troops from the right to the 
left flank during the night and attack the 
French right flank the following day. Opin- 



ions were divided, and arguments were ad- 
vanced for and against that project. Ermolov, 
Dokhturov, and Ravski agreed with Bennig- . 
sen. Whether feeling it necessary to make a 
sacrifice before abandoning the capital or 
guided by other, personal considerations, these 
generals seemed not to understand that this 
council could not alter the inevitable course of 
events and that Moscow was in effect already 
abandoned. The other generals, however, un- 
derstood it and, leaving aside the question of 
Moscow, spoke of the direction the army should 
take in its retreat. Matesha, who kept her eyes 
fixed on what was going on before her, under- 
stood the meaning of the council differently. 
It seemed to her that it was only a personal 
struggle between "Granddad" and "Long-coat" 
as she termed Bennigsen. She saw that they 
grew spiteful when they spoke to one another, 
and in her heart she sided with "Granddad." 
In the midst of the conversation she noticed 
"Granddad" give Bennigsen a quick, subtle 
glance, and then to her joy she saw that "Grand- 
dad" said something to "Long-coat" which set- 
tled him. Bennigsen suddenly reddened and 
paced angrily up and down the room. What 
so affected him was Kutuzov's calm and quiet 
comment on the advantage or disadvantage of 
Bennigsen's proposal to move troops by night 
from the right to the left flank to attack the 
French right wing. 

"Gentlemen," said Kutuzov, "I cannot ap- 
prove of the count's plan. Moving troops in 
close proximity to an enemy is always danger- 
ous, and military history supports that view. 
For instance . . ." Kutuzov seemed to reflect, 
searching for an example, then with a clear, 
nai've look at Bennigsen he added: "Oh yes; 
take the battle of Friedland, which I think the 
count well remembers, and which was . . . not 
fully successful, only because our troops were 
rearranged too near the enemy. . . ." 

There followed a momentary pause, which 
seemed very long to them all. 

The discussion recommenced, but pauses fre- 
quently occurred and they all felt that there 
was no more to be said. 

During one of these pauses Kuttizov heaved 
a deep sigh as if preparing to speak. They all 
looked at him. 

"Well, gentlemen, I see that it is I who will 
have to pay for the broken crockery," said he, 
and rising slowly he moved to the table. "Gen- 
tlemen, I have heard your views. Some of you 
will not agree with me. But I," he paused, "by 
the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign 



BOOK ELEVEN 



475 



and country, order a retreat." 

After that the generals began to disperse 
with the solemnity and circumspect silence of 
people who are leaving after a funeral. 

Some of the generals, in low tones and in a 
strain very different from the way they had 
spoken during the council, communicated 
something to their commander in chief. 

Malasha, who had long been expected for 
supper, climbed carefully backwards down 
from the oven, her bare little feet catching at 
its projections, and slipping between the legs 
of the generals she darted out of the room. 

When he had dismissed the generals Kutu- 
zov sat a long time with his elbows on the 
table, thinking always of the same terrible 
question: "When, when did the abandonment 
of Moscow become inevitable? When was that 
done which settled the matter? And who was 
to blame for it?" 

"I did not expect this/' said he to his adju- 
tant Schneider when the latter came in late 
that night. "I did not expect this! I did not 
think this would happen." 

"You should take some rest, your Serene 
Highness," replied Schneider. 

"But nol They shall eat horseflesh yet, like 
the Turks I" exclaimed Kutiizov without reply- 
ing, striking the table with his podgy fist. 
"They shall too, if only . . ." 

CHAPTER V 

AT THAT VERY TIME, in circumstances even more 
important than retreating without a battle, 
namely the evacuation and burning of Mos- 
cow, Rostopchfn, who is usually represented 
as being the instigator of that event, acted in 
an altogether different manner from Kutiizov. 

After the battle of Borodin6 the abandon- 
ment and burning of Moscow was as inevi- 
table as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow 
without fighting. 

Every Russian might have predicted it, not 
by reasoning but by the feeling implanted in 
each of us and in our fathers. 

The same thing that took place in Moscow 
had happened in all the towns and villages on 
Russian soil beginning with Smolensk, with- 
out the participation of Count Rostopchfn and 
his broadsheets. The people awaited the en- 
emy unconcernedly, did not riot or become ex- 
cited or tear anyone to pieces, but faced its 
fate, feeling within it the strength to find what 
it should do at that most difficult moment. 
And as soon as the enemy drew near the weal thy 
classes went away abandoning their property, 



while the poorer remained and burned and 
destroyed what was left. 

The consciousness that this would be so and 
would always be so was and is present in the 
heart of every Russian. And a consciousness of 
this, and a foreboding that Moscow would be 
taken, was present in Russian Moscow society 
in 1812. Those who had quitted Moscow al- 
ready in July and at the beginning of August 
showed that they expected this. Those who 
went away, taking what they could and aban- 
doning their houses and half their belong- 
ings, did so from the latent patriotism which 
expresses itself not by phrases or by giving 
one's children to save the fatherland and 
similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively, 
simply, organically, and therefore in the way 
that always produces the most powerful re- 
sults. 

"It is disgraceful to run away from danger; 
only cowards are running away from Moscow," 
they were told. In his broadsheets Rostopchin 
impressed on them that to leave Moscow was 
shameful. They were ashamed to be called 
cowards, ashamed to leave, but still they left, 
knowing it had to be done. Why did they go? 
It is impossible to suppose that Rostopchfn 
had scared them by his accounts of horrors Na- 
poleon had committed in conquered countries. 
The first people to go away were the rich edu- 
cated people who knew quite well that Vienna 
and Berlin had remained intact and that dur- 
ing Napoleon's occupation the inhabitants 
had spent their time pleasantly in the com- 
pany of the charming Frenchmen whom the 
Russians, and especially the Russian ladies, 
then liked so much. 

They went away because for Russians there 
could be no question as to whether things 
would go well or ill under French rule in Mos- 
cow. It was out of the question to be under 
French rule, it would be the worst thing that 
could happen. They went away even before 
the battle of Borodin6 and still more rapidly 
after it, despite Rostopchin's calls to defend 
Moscow or the announcement of his intention 
to take the wonder-working icon of the Iberi- 
an Mother of God and go to fight, or of the 
balloons that were to destroy the French, and 
despite all the nonsense Rostopchfn wrote in 
his broadsheets. They knew that it was for the 
army to fight, and that if it could not succeed 
it would not do to take young ladies and house 
serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to 
fight Napoleon, and that they must go away, 
sorry as they were to abandon their property 



476 



WAR AND PEACE 



to destruction. They went away without think- 
ing of the tremendous significance of that im- 
mense and wealthy city being given over to 
destruction, for a great city with wooden build- 
ings was certain when abandoned by its in- 
habitants to be burned. They went away each 
on his own account, and yet it was only in con- 
sequence of their going away that the momen- 
tous event was accomplished that will always 
remain the greatest glory of the Russian peo- 
ple. The lady who, afraid of being stopped by 
Count Rostopchin's orders, had already in 
June moved with her Negroes and her women 
jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate, with 
a vague consciousness that she was not Bona- 
parte's servant, was really, simply, and truly 
carrying out the great work which saved Russia. 
But Count Rostopchin, who now taunted those 
who left Moscow and now had the govern- 
ment offices removed; now distributed quite 
useless weapons to the drunken rabble; now 
had processions displaying the icons, arid now 
forbade Father Augustin to remove icons or 
the relics of saints; now seized all the private 
carts in Moscow and on one hundred and 
thirty-six of them removed the balloon that 
was being constructed by Leppich; now hinted 
that he would burn Moscow and related how 
he had set fire to his own house; now wrote a 
proclamation to the French solemnly upbraid- 
ing them for having destroyed his Orphanage; 
now claimed the glory of having hinted that 
he would burn Moscow and now repudiated 
the deed; now ordered the people to catch all 
spies and bring them to him, and now re- 
proached them for doing so; now expelled all 
the French residents from Moscow, and now 
allowed Madame Aubert-Chalme' (the center 
of the whole French colony in Moscow) to re- 
main, but ordered the venerable old postmas- 
ter Klyucharev to be arrested and exiled for no 
particular offense; now assembled the people 
at the Three Hills to fight the French and now, 
to get rid of them, handed over to them a man 
to be killed and himself drove away by a back 
gate; now declared that he would not survive 
the fall of Moscow, and now wrote French 
verses in albums concerning his share in the 
affair this man did not understand the mean- 
ing of what was happening but merely wanted 
to do something himself that would astonish 
people, to perform some patriotically heroic 
feat; and like a child he made sport of the mo- 
mentous and unavoidable event the abandon- 
ment and burning of Moscow and tried with 
his puny hand now to speed and now to stay 



the enormous, popular tide that bore him 
along with it. 

CHAPTER VI 

HEL&amp;NE, having returned with the court from 
Vilna to Petersburg, found herself in a difficult 
position. 

In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special 
protection of a grandee who occupied one of 
the highest posts in the Empire. In Vilna she 
had formed an intimacy with a young foreign 
prince. When she returned to Petersburg both 
the magnate and the prince were there, and 
both claimed their rights. He'lene was faced by 
a new problem how to preserve her intimacy 
with both without offending either. 

What would have seemed difficult or even 
impossible to another woman did not cause 
the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukho- 
va, who evidently deserved her reputation of 
being a very clever woman. Had she attempted 
concealment, or tried to extricate herself from 
her awkward position by cunning, she would 
have spoiled her case by acknowledging her- 
self guilty. But Hellene, like a really great man 
who can do whatever he pleases, at once as- 
sumed her own position to be correct, as she 
sincerely believed it to be, and that everyone 
else was to blame. 

The first time the young foreigner allowed 
hirnselt to reproach her, she lifted her beauti- 
ful head and, half turning to him, said firmly: 
"That's just like a man selfish and cruel! I 
expected nothing else. A woman sacrifices her- 
self for you, she suffers, and this is her reward! 
What right have you, monseigneur, to demand 
an account of my attachments and friendships? 
He is a man who has been more than a father 
to me I" The prince was about to say some- 
thing, but He'lene interrupted him. 

"Well, yes," said she, "it may be that he has 
other sentiments for me than those of a father, 
but that is not a reason for me to shut my door 
on him. I am not a man, that I should repay 
kindness with ingratitude! Know, monsei- 
gneur, that in all that relates to my intimate 
feelings I render account only to God and to 
my conscience," she concluded, layinghcr hand 
on her beautiful, fully expanded bosom and 
looking up to heaven. 

"But for heaven's sake listen to mel" 

"Marry me, and I will be your slavel" 

"But that's impossible." 

"You won't deign to demean yourself by 
marrying me, you . . ." said He'lfcne, beginning 
to cry. 



The prince tried to comfort her, but Hlene, 
as if quite distraught, said through her tears 
that there was nothing to prevent her marry- 
ing, that there were precedents (there were up 
to that time very few, but she mentioned Na- 
poleon and some other exalted personages), 
that she had never been her husband's wife, 
and that she had been sacrificed. 

"But the law, religion . . .".said the prince, 
already yielding. 

"The law, religion . . . What have they been 
invented for if they can't arrange that?" said 



The prince was surprised that so simple 
an idea had not occurred to him, and he ap- 
plied for advice to the holy brethren of the 
Society of Jesus, with whom he was on inti- 
mate terms. 

A few days later at one of those enchanting 
fetes which Hlenc gave at her country house 
on the Stone Island, the charming Monsieur 
de Jobert, a man no longer young, with snow- 
white hair and brilliant black eyes, a Jesuit d 
robe courte, 1 was presented to her, and in the 
garden by the light of the illuminations and to 
the sound of music talked to her for a long 
time of the love of God, of Christ, of the Sacred 
Heart, and of the consolations the one true 
Catholic religion affords in this world and the 
next. Htf'lcne was touched, and more than once 
tears rose to her eyes and to those of Monsieur 
de Jobert and their voices trembled. A dance, 
for which her partner came to seek her, put an 
end to her discourse with her future directeur 
de conscience, but the next evening Monsieur 
de Jobert came to see Helene when she was 
alone, and after that often came again. 

One day he took the countess to a Roman 
Catholic church, where she knelt down before 
the altar to which she was led. The enchant- 
ing, middle-aged Frenchman laid his hands on 
her head and, as she herself afterward de- 
scribed it, she felt something like a fresh breeze 
wafted into her soul. It was explained to her 
that this was la grdce. 

After that a long-frocked abb was brought 
to her. She confessed to him, and he absolved 
her from her sins. Next day she received a box 
containing the Sacred Host, which was left at 
her house for her to partake of. A few days 
later Helene learned with pleasure that she 
had now been admitted to the true Catholic 
Church and that in a few days the Pope him- 
self would hear of her and would send her a 
certain document. 

1 Lay member of the Society of Jesus. 



BOOK ELEVEN 477 

All that was done around her and to her at 
this time, all the attention devoted to her by 
so many clever men and expressed in such 
pleasant, refined ways, and the state of dove- 
like purity she was now in (she wore only 
white dresses and white ribbons all that time) 
gave her pleasure, but her pleasure did not 
cause her for a moment to forget her aim. And 
as it always happens in contests of cunning 
that a stupid person gets the better of cleverer 
ones, Htflt-ne having realized that the main 
object of all these words and all this trouble 
was, after converting her to Catholicism, to 
obtain money from her for Jesuit institutions 
(as to which she received indications) before 
parting with her money insisted that the vari- 
ous operations necessary to free her from her 
husband should be performed. In her view the 
aim of every religion was merely to preserve 
certain proprieties while affording satisfaction 
to human desires. And with this aim, in one 
of her talks with her Father Confessor, she in- 
sisted on an answer to the question, in how far 
was she bound by her marriage? 

They were sitting in the twilight by a win- 
dow in the drawing room. The scent of flowers 
came in at the window. Hc*lcne was wearing a 
white dress, transparent over her shoulders and 
bosom. The abbe*, a well-fed man with a plump, 
clean-shaven chin, a pleasant firm mouth, and 
white hands meekly folded on his knees, sat 
close to Helene and, with a subtle smile on his 
lips and a peaceful look of delight at her 
beauty, occasionally glanced at her face as he 
explained his opinion on the subject. He*lene 
with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair 
and his plump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks 
and every moment expected the conversation 
to take a fresh turn. But the abbe 1 , though he 
evidently enjoyed the beauty of his compan- 
ion, was absorbed in his mastery of the matter. 

The course of the Father Confessor's argu- 
ments ran as follows: "Ignorant of the import 
of what you were undertaking, you made a 
vow of conjugal fidelity to a man who on his 
part, by entering the married state without 
faith in the religious significance of marriage, 
committed an act of sacrilege. That marriage 
lacked the dual significance it should have had. 
Yet in spite of this your vow was binding. You 
swerved from it. What did you commit by so 
acting? A venial, or a mortal, sin? A venial sin, 
for you acted without evil intention. If now 
you married again with the object of bearing 
children, your sin might be forgiven. But the 
question is again a twofold one: firstly . , ." 



478 

But suddenly Hlne, who was getting bored, 
said with one of her bewitching smiles: "But I 
think that having espoused the true religion I 
cannot be bound by what a false religion laid 
upon me." 

The director of her conscience was astounded 
at having the case presented to him thus with 
the simplicity of Columbus' egg. He was de- 
lighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pu- 
pil's progress, but could not abandon the edi- 
fice of argument he had laboriously constructed. 

"Let us understand one another, Countess," 
said he with a smile, and began refuting his 
spiritual daughter's arguments. 

CHAPTER VII 

HELENE UNDERSTOOD that the question was very 
simple and easy from the ecclesiastical point 
of view, and that her directors were making 
difficulties only because they were apprehen- 
sive as to how the matter would be regarded 
by the secular authorities. 

So she decided that it was necessary to pre- 
pare the opinion of society. She provoked the 
jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him 
what she had told her other suitor; that is, she 
put the matter so that the only way for him to 
obtain a right over her was to marry her. The 
elderly magnate was at first as much taken 
aback by this suggestion of marriage with a 
woman whose husband was alive, as the young- 
er man had been, but He"lene's imperturbable 
conviction that it was as simple and natural as 
marrying a maiden had its effect on him too. 
Had Hellene herself shown the least sign of 
hesitation, shame, or secrecy, her cause would 
certainly have been lost; but not only did she 
show no signs of secrecy or shame, on the con- 
trary, with good-natured naivete she told her 
intimate friends (and these were all Peters- 
burg) that both the prince and the magnate 
had proposed to her and that she loved both 
and was afraid of grieving either. 

A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg, 
not that Helene wanted to be divorced from 
her husband (had such a report spread many 
would have opposed so illegal an intention) 
but simply that the unfortunate and interest- 
ing Hellene was in doubt which of the two 
men she should marry. The question was no 
longer whether this was possible, but only 
which was the better match and how the mat- 
ter would be regarded at court. There were, it 
is true, some rigid individuals unable to rise to 
the height of such a question, who saw in the 
project a desecration of the sacrament of mar- 



WAR AND PEACE 



riage, but there were not many such and they 
remained silent, while the majority were inter- 
ested in Hellene's good fortune and in the 
question which match would be the more ad- 
vantageous. Whether it was right or wrong to 
remarry while one had a husband living they 
did not discuss, for that question had evi- 
dently been settled by people "wiser than you 
or me," as they said, and to doubt the correct- 
ness of that decision would be to risk exposing 
one's stupidity and incapacity to live in society. 

Only MArya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, who 
had come to Petersburg that summer to see 
one of her sons, allowed herself plainly to ex- 
press an opinion contrary to the general one. 
Meeting Hellene at a ball she stopped her in 
the middle of the room and, amid general si- 
lence, said in her gruff voice: "So wives of liv- 
ing men have started marrying again! Perhaps 
you think you have invented a novelty? You 
have been forestalled, my dearl It was thought 
of long ago. It is done in all the brothels," and 
with these words Mdrya Dmitrievna, turning 
up her wide sleeves with her usual threatening 
gesture and glancing sternly round, moved 
across the room. 

Though people were afraid of Marya Dmi- 
trievna she was regarded in Petersburg as a 
buffoon, and so of what she had said they only 
noticed, and repeated in a whisper, the one 
coarse word she had used, supposing the whole 
sting of her remark to lie in that word. 

Prince Vasili, who of late very often forgot 
what he had said and repeated one and the 
same thing a hundred times, remarked to his 
daughter whenever he chanced to see her: 

"Helene, I have a word to say to you," and 
he would lead her aside, drawing her hand 
downward. "I have heard of certain projects 
concerning . . . you know. Well, my dear child, 
you know how your father's heart rejoices to 
know that you . . . You have suffered so much. 
. . . But, my dear child, consult only your own 
heart. That is all I have to say," and conceal- 
ing his unvarying emotion he would press his 
cheek against his daughter's and move away. 

Bilfbin, who had not lost his reputation of 
an exceedingly clever man, and who was oneof 
the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman 
as Helene always hasmen friends who can 
never change into lovers once gave her his 
view of the matter at a small and intimate 
gathering. 

"Listen, Bilibin," said Helene (she always 
called friends of that sort by their surnames), 
and she touched his coat sleeve with her white, 



BOOK ELEVEN 



479 



beringed fingers. "Tell me, as you would a 
sister, what I ought to do. Which of the two?" 

Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eye- 
brows and pondered, with a smile on his lips. 

"You are not taking me unawares, you know," 
said he. "As a true friend, I have thought and 
thought again about your affair. You see, if 
you marry the prince" he meant the younger 
man and he crooked one finger, "you forever 
lose the chance of marrying the other, and you 
will displease the court besides. (You know 
there is some kind of connection.) But if you 
marry the old count you will make his last 
days happy, and as widow of the Grand . . . the 
prince would no longer be making a misalli- 
ance by marrying you," and Bilfbin smoothed 
out his forehead. 

"That's a true friend I" said Hlene beam- 
ing, and again touching Bilfbin's sleeve. "But 
I love them, you know, and don't want to dis- 
tress either of them. I would give my life for 
the happiness of them both." 

Bilibin shrugged his shoulders, as much as 
to say that not even he could help in that dif- 
ficulty. 

"Unemaitresse-femme!* That's what is called 
putting things squarely. She would like to be 
married to all three at the same time," thought 
he. 

"But tell me, how will your husband look 
at the matter?" Bilibin asked, his reputation 
being so well established that he did not fear 
to ask so naive a question. "Will he agree?" 

"Oh, he loves me so!" said Hlne, who for 
some reason imagined that Pierre too loved 
her. "He will do anything for me." 

Bilibin puckered his skin in preparation for 
something witty. 

"Even divorce you?" said he. 

Helene laughed. 

Among those who ventured to doubt the 
justifiability of the proposed marriage was He 1 - 
lne's mother, Princess Kurdgina. She was con- 
tinually tormented by jealousy of her daugh- 
ter, and now that jealousy concerned a sub- 
ject near to her own heart, she could not rec- 
oncile herself to the idea. She consulted a Rus- 
sian priest as to the possibility of divorce and 
remarriage during a husband's lifetime, and 
the priest told her that it was impossible, and 
to her delight showed her a text in the Gospel 
which (as it seemed to him) plainly forbids 
remarriage while the husband is alive. 

Armed with these arguments, which ap- 
peared to her unanswerable, she drove to her 

1 A masterly woman. 



daughter's early one morning so as to find her 
alone. 

Having listened to her mother's objections, 
Helene smiled blandly and ironically. 

"But it says plainly: 'Whosoever shall marry 
her that is divorced . . .' " said the old prin- 
cess. 

"Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de bStises. Vous 
ne comprenez rien. Dans ma position fat des 
devoirs,"* said Helene changing from Rus- 
sian, in which language she always felt that 
her case did not sound quite clear, into French 
which suited it better. 

"But, my dear . . ." 

"Oh, Mamma, how is it you don't understand 
that the Holy Father, who has the right to 
grant dispensations . . ." 

Just then the lady companion who lived 
with H^lene came in to announce that Hi? 
Highness was in the ballroom and wished tc 
see her. 

"Non, dites-lui que je ne veux pas le voir 
que je suis furieuse centre lui&gt; parce qu'il m' c 
manque parole" 8 

"Comtesse, a tout peche misMcorde" * saic 
a fair-haired young man with a long face anc 
nose, as he entered the room. 

The old princess rose respectfully and curt 
sied. The young man who had entered took nc 
notice of her. The princess nodded to hei 
daughter and sidled out of the room. 

"Yes, she is right," thought the old princess 
all her convictions dissipated by the appear 
ance of His Highness. "She is right, but how i: 
it that we in our irrecoverable youth did no 
know it? Yet it is so simple," she thought as sru 
got into her carriage. 

By the beginning of August Hlne's affair 
were clearly defined and she wrote a letter t&lt; 
her husbandwho, as she imagined, loved he 
very much informing him of her intention t&lt; 
marry N.N. and of her having embraced th&lt; 
one true faith, and asking him to carry out al 
die formalities necessary for a divorce, whicl 
would be explained to him by the bearer o 
the letter. 

And so I pray God to have you, my friend, ii 
His holy and powerful keeping Your frien 
HcHene. 

8 "Oh, Mamma, don't talk nonsense! You don' 
understand anything. In my position I have obli 
gations." 

*"No, tell him I don't wish to see him, I ar 
furious with him for not keeping his word to ine. 
* "Countess, there is mercy for every sin. 



480 

This letter was brought to Pierre's house 
when he was on the field of Borodin6. 



CHAPTER VIII 

TOWARD THE END of the battle of Borodin6, 
Pierre, having run down from Rae"vski's bat- 
tery a second time, made his way through a 
gully to Knyazk6vo with a crowd of soldiers, 
reached the dressing station, and seeing blood 
and hearing cries and groans hurried on, still 
entangled in the crowds of soldiers. 

The one thing he now desired with his whole 
soul was to get away quickly from the terrible 
sensations amid which he had lived that day 
and return to ordinary conditions of life and 
sleep quietly in a room in his own bed. He felt 
that only in the ordinary conditions of life 
would he be able to understand himself and 
all he had seen and felt. But such ordinary 
conditions of life were nowhere to be found. 

Though shells and bullets did not whistle 
over the road along which he was going, still 
on all sides there was what there had been on 
the field of battle. There were still the same 
suffering, exhausted, and sometimes strangely 
indifferent faces, the same blood, the same sol- 
diers' overcoats, the same sounds of firing 
which, though distant now, still aroused terror, 
and besides this there were the foul air and the 
dust. 

Having gone a couple of miles along the 
Mozhaysk road, Pierre sat down by the road- 
side. 

Dusk had fallen, and the roar of guns died 
away. Pierre lay leaning on his elbow for a long 
time, gazing at the shadows that moved past 
him in the darkness. He was continually imag- 
ining that a cannon ball was flying toward him 
with a terrific whizz, and then he shuddered 
and sat up. He had no idea how long he had 
been there. In the middle of the night three 
soldiers, having brought some firewood, set- 
tled down near him and began lighting a fire. 

The soldiers, who threw sidelong glances at 
Pierre, got the fire to burn and placed an iron 
pot on it into which they broke some dried 
bread and put a little dripping. The pleasant 
odor of greasy viands mingled with the smell 
of smoke. Pierre sat up and sighed. The three 
soldiers were eating and talking among them- 
selves, taking no notice of him. 

"And who may you be?" one of them sud- 
denly asked Pierre, evidently meaning what 
Pierre himself had in mind, namely: "If you 
want to eat we'll give you some food, only let 
us know whether you are an honest man." 



WAR AND PEACE 

"I, I ..." said Pierre, feeling it necessary to 
minimize his social position as much as possi- 
ble so as to be nearer to the soldiers and better 
understood by them. "By rights I am a militia 
officer, but my men are not here. I came to the 
battle and have lost them." 

"There now!" said one of the soldiers. 

Another shook his head. 

"Would you like a little mash?" the first sol- 
dier asked, and handed Pierre a wooden spoon 
after licking it clean. 

Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating 
the mash, as they called the food in the caul- 
dron, and he thought it more delicious than 
any food he had ever tasted. As he sat bending 
greedily over it, helping himself to large spoon- 
fuls and chewing one after another, his face 
was lit up by the fire and the soldiers looked 
at him in silence. 

"Where have you to go to? Tell us!" said 
one of them. 

"To Mozhdysk." 

"You're a gentleman, aren't you?" 

"Yes." 

"And what's your name?" 

"Peter Kirilych." 

"Well then, Peter Kirilych, come along with 
us, we'll take you there." 

In the total darkness the soldiers walked 
with Pierre to Mozhdysk. 

By the time they got near Mozhdysk and be- 
gan ascending the steep hill into the town, the 
cocks were already crowing. Pierre went on 
with the soldiers, quite forgetting that his inn 
was at the bottom of the hill and that he had 
already passed it. He would not soon have re- 
membered this, such was his state of forgetful- 
ness, had he not halfway up the hill stumbled 
upon his groom, who had been to look for him 
in the town and was returning to the inn. The 
groom recognized Pierre in the darkness by 
his white hat. 

"Your excellency!" he said. "Why, we were 
beginning to despair! How is it you are on 
foot? And where are you going, please?" 

"Oh, yes!" said Pierre. 

The soldiers stopped. 

"So you've found your folk?" said one of 
them. "Well, good-by, Peter Kirilych-isn't it?" 

"Good-by, Peter Kirilychl" Pierre heard the 
other voices repeat. 

"Good-by!" he said and turned with his 
groom toward the inn. 

"I ought to give them something!" he 
thought, and felt in his pocket. "No, better 
notl" said another, inner voice. 



BOOK ELEVEN 



481 



There was not a room to be had at the inn, 
they were all occupied. Pierre went out into 
the yard and, covering himself up head and 
all, lay down in his carriage. 

CHAPTER IX 

SCARCELY HAD PIERRE laid his head on the pil- 
low before he felt himself falling asleep, but 
suddenly, almost with the distinctness of re- 
ality, he heard the boom, boom, boom of fir- 
ing, the thud of projectiles, groans and cries, 
and smelled blood and powder, and a feeling 
of horror and dread of death seized him. Filled 
with fright he opened his eyes and lifted his 
head from under his cloak. All was tranquil 
in the yard. Only someone's orderly passed 
through the gateway, splashing through the 
mud, and talked to the innkeeper. Above 
Pierre's head some pigeons, disturbed by the 
movement he had made in sitting up, fluttered 
under the dark roof of the penthouse. The 
whole courtyard was permeated by a strong 
peaceful smell of stable yards, delightful to 
Pierre at that moment. He could see the clear 
starry sky between the dark roofs of two pent- 
houses. 

"Thank God, there is no more of that!" he 
thought, covering up his head again. "Oh, 
what a terrible thing is fear, and how shame- 
fully I yielded to it! But they . . . they were 
steady and calm all the time, to the end . . ." 
thought he. 

They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, 
those who had been at the battery, those who 
had given him food, and those who had prayed 
before the icon. They, those strange men he 
had not previously known, stood out clearly 
and sharply from everyone else. 

"To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thought 
Pierre as he fell asleep, "to enter communal 
life completely, to be imbued by what makes 
them what they are. But how cast off all the 
superfluous, devilish burden of my outer man? 
There was a time when I could have done it. I 
could have run away from my father, as I 
wanted to. Or 1 might have been sent to serve 
as a soldier after the duel with D61okhov." 
And the memory of the dinner at the English 
Club when he hacl challenged Dolokhov flashed 
through Pierre's mind, and then he remem- 
bered his benefactor at Torzhok. And now a 
picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge pre- 
sented itself to his mind. It was taking place at 
the English Club and someone near and dear 
to him sat at the end of the table. "Yes, that is 
hel It is my benefactor. But he died!" thought 



Pierre. "Yes, he died, and I did not know he 
was alive. How sorry I am that he died, and 
how glad I am that he is alive again!" On one 
side of the table sat Anatole, Dolokhov, Nes- 
vftski, Denisov, and others like them (in his 
dream the category to which these men be- 
longed was as clearly defined in his mind as 
the category of those he termed they), and he 
heard those people, Anatole and Dolokhov, 
shouting and singing loudly; yet through their 
shouting the voice of his benefactor was heard 
speaking all the time and the sound of his 
words was as weighty and uninterrupted as the 
booming on the battlefield, but pleasant and 
comforting. Pierre did not understand what 
his benefactor was saying, but he knew (the 
categories of thoughts were also quite distinct 
in his dream) that he was talking of goodness 
and the possibility of being what they were. 
And they with their simple, kind, firm faces 
surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But 
though they were kindly they did not look at 
Pierre and did not know him. Wishing to 
speak and to attract their attention, he got up, 
but at that moment his legs grew cold and 
bare. 

He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered 
his legs from whichhiscloakhad in factslipped. 
For a moment as he was rearranging his cloak 
Pierre opened his eyes and saw the same pent- 
house roofs, posts, and yard, but now they were 
all bluish, lit up, and glittering with frost or 
dew. 

"It is dawn," thought Pierre. "But that's not 
what I want. I want to hear and understand 
my benefactor's words." Again he covered him- 
self up with his cloak, but now neither the 
lodge nor his benefactor was there. There were 
only thoughts clearly expressed in words 
thoughts that someone was uttering or that he 
himself was formulating. 

Afterwards when he recalled those thought? 
Pierre was convinced that someone outside 
himself had spoken them, though the impres 
sions of that day had evoked them. He had 
never, it seemed to him, been able to think 
and express his thoughts like that when awake 

"To endure war is the most difficult subor 
d ination of man's freedom to the law of God/ 
the voice had said. "Simplicity is submission tc 
the will of God; you cannot escape from Him 
And they are simple. They do not talk, but act 
The spoken word is silver but the unspoken ii 
golden. Man can be master of nothing whil&lt; 
he fears death, but he who does not fear it pos 
sesses all. If there were no suffering, man woulc 



WAR AND PEACE 



not know his limitations, would not know 
himself. The hardest thing [Pierre went on 
thinking, or hearing, in his dream] is to be 
able in your soul to unite the meaning of all. 
To unite all?" he asked himself. "No, not to 
unite. Thoughts cannot be united, but to har- 
ness all these thoughts together is what we 
need! Yes, one must harness them, must har- 
ness them!" he repeated to himself with in- 
ward rapture, feeling that these words and they 
alone expressed what he wanted to say and 
solved the question that tormented him. 

"Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness." 

"Time to harness, time to harness, your ex- 
cellency! Your excellency!" some voice was re- 
peating. "We must harness, it is time to har- 
ness. . . ." 

It was the voice of the groom, trying to wake 
him. The sun shone straight into Pierre's face. 
He glanced at the dirty innyard in the middle 
of which soldiers were watering their lean 
horses at the pump while carts were passing 
out of the gate. Pierre turned away with re- 
pugnance, and closing his eyes quickly fell 
back on the carriage seat. "No, I don't want 
that, I don't want to see and understand that. 
I want to understand what was revealing itself 
to me in my dream. One second more and I 
should have understood it all! But what am 1 
to do? Harness, but how can I harness every- 
thing?" and Pierre felt with horror that the 
meaning of all he had seen and thought in the 
dream had been destroyed. 

The groom, the coachman, and the innkeep- 
er told Pierre that an officer had come with 
news that the French were already near Moz- 
hiysk and that our men were leaving it. 

Pierre got up and, having told them to har- 
ness and overtake him, went on foot through 
the town. 

The troops were moving on, leaving about 
ten thousand wounded behind them. There 
were wounded in the yards, at the windows of 
the houses, and the streets were crowded with 
them. In the streets, around carts that were to 
take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, 
and blows could be heard. Pierre offered the 
use of his carriage, which had overtaken him, 
to a wounded general he knew, and drove with 
him to Moscow. On the way Pierre was told 
of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and 
of that of Prince Andrew. 

CHAPTER X 

ON THE THIRTIETH OF AUGUST Pierre reached 
Moscow. Close to the gates of the city he was 



met by Count Rostopchfn's adjutant. 

"We have been looking for you everywhere," 
said the adjutant. "The count wants to see you 
particularly. He asks you to come to him at 
once on a very important matter." 

Without going home Pierre took a cab and 
drove to see the Moscow commander in chief. 

Count Rostopchfn had only that morning 
returned to town from his summer villa at So- 
k61niki. The anteroom and reception room of 
his house were full of officials who had been 
summoned or had come for orders. Vasflchi- 
kov and Pldtov had already seen the count and 
explained to him that it was impossible to de- 
fend MoscoW and that it would have to be sur- 
rendered. Though this news was being con- 
cealed from the inhabitants, the officialsthe 
heads of the various government departments 
knew that Moscow would soon be in the en- 
emy's hands, just as Count Rostopchin himself 
knew it, and to escape personal responsibility 
they had all come to the governor to ask how 
they were to deal with their various depart- 
ments. 

As Pierre was entering the reception room 
a courier from the army came out of Rostop- 
chin's private room. 

In answer to questions with which he was 
greeted, the courier made a despairing gesture 
with his hand and passed through the room. 

While waiting in the reception room Pierre 
with weary eyes watched the various officials, 
old and young, military and civilian, who were 
there. They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy. 
Pierre went up to a group of men, one of 
whom he knew. After greeting Pierre they con- 
tinued their conversation. 

"If they're sent out and brought back again 
later on it will do no harm, but as things are 
now one can't answer for anything." 

"But you see what he writes . . ." said an- 
other, pointing to a printed sheet he held in 
his hand. 

"That's another matter. That's necessary for 
the people," said the first. 

"What is it?" asked Pierre. 

"Oh, it's a fresh broadsheet." 

Pierre took it and began reading. 

His Serene Highness has passed through Moz- 
hiysk in order to join up with the troops moving 
toward him and has taken up a strong position 
where the enemy will not soon attack him. Forty- 
eight guns with ammunition have been sent him 
from here, and his Serene Highness says he will 
defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is 
even ready to fight in the streets. Do not be upset, 



brothers, that the law courts are closed; things 
have to be put in order, and we will deal with vil- 
lains in our own way! When the time comes I shall 
want both town and peasant lads and will raise 
the cry a day or two beforehand, but they are not 
wanted yet so I hold my peace. An ax will be use- 
ful, a hunting spear not bad, but a three-pronged 
fork will be best of all: a Frenchman is no heavier 
than a sheaf of rye. Tomorrow after dinner I shall 
take the Iberian icon of the Mother of God to the 
wounded in the Catherine Hospital where we will 
have some water blessed. That will help them to 
get well quicker. I, too, am well now: one of my 
eyes was sore but now I am on the lookout with 
both. 

"But military men have told me that it is 
impossible to fight in the town/' said Pierre, 
"and that the position . . ." 

"Well, of course! That's what we were say- 
ing," replied the first speaker. 

"And what does he mean by 'One of my 
eyes was sore but now I am on the lookout with 
both'?" asked Pierre. 

"The count had a sty," replied the adjutant 
smiling, "and was very much upset when I told 
him people had come to ask what was the mat- 
ter with him. By the by, Count," he added 
suddenly, addressing Pierre with a smile, "we 
heard that you have family troubles and that 
the countess, your wife . . ." 

"I have heard nothing," Pierre replied un- 
concernedly. "But what have you heard?" 

"Oh, well, you know people often invent 
things. I only say what I heard." 

"But what did you hear?" 

"Well, they say," continued the adjutant 
with the same smile, "that the countess, your 
wife, is preparing to go abroad. I expect it's 
nonsense. . . ." 

"Possibly," remarked Pierre, looking about 
him absent-mindedly. "And who is that?" he 
asked, indicating a short old man in a clean 
blue peasant overcoat, with a big snow-white 
beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face. 

"He? That's a tradesman, that is to say, he's 
the restaurant keeper, Vereshchdgin. Perhaps 
you have heard of that affair with the procla- 
mation." 

"Oh, so that is Vereshchgin!" said Pierre, 
looking at the firm, calm face of the old man 
and seeking any indication of his being a 
traitor. 

"That's not he himself, that's the father of 
the fellow who wrote the proclamation," said 
the adjutant. "The young man is in prison 
and I expect it will go hard with him." 

An old gentleman wearing a star and anoth- 



BOOK ELEVEN 483 

er official, a German wearing a cross round his 



neck, approached the speaker. 

"It's a complicated story, you know," said 
the adjutant. "That proclamation appeared 
about two months ago. The count was in- 
formed of it. He gave orders to investigate the 
matter. Gabriel Ivdnovich here made the in- 
quiries. The proclamation had passed through 
exactly sixty-three hands. He asked one, 'From 
whom did you get it?' 'From so-and-so.' He went 
to the next one. 'From whom did you get it?' 
and so on till he reached Vereshch^gin, a half- 
educated tradesman, you know, 4 a pet of a 
trader,' " said the adjutant smiling. "They 
asked him, 'Who gave it you?' And the point is 
that we knew whom he had it from. He could 
only have had it from the Postmaster. But evi- 
dently they had come to some understanding. 
He replied: 'From no one; I made it up my- 
self.' They threatened and questioned him, 
but he stuck to that: 'I made it up myself.' And 
so it was reported to the count, who sent for 
the man. 'From whom did you get the procla- 
mation?' 'I wrote it myself.' Well, you know 
the count," said the adjutant cheerfully, with a 
smile of pride, "he flared up dreadfullyand 
just think of the fellow's audacity, lying, and 
obstinacy!" 

"And the count wanted him to say it was 
from Klyucharev? I understand!" said Pierre. 

"Not at all," rejoined the adjutant in dis- 
may. "Klyucharev had his own sins to answer 
for without that and that is why he has been 
banished. But the point is that the count was 
much annoyed. 'How could you have written 
it yourself?' said he, arid he took up the Ham- 
burg Gazette that was lying on the table. 
'Here it is! You did not write it yourself but 
translated it, and translated it abominably, be- 
cause you don't even know French, you fool.' 
And what do you think? 'No,' said he, 'I have 
not read any papers, I made it up myself.' 'If 
that's so, you're a traitor and I'll have you 
tried, and you'll be hanged! Say from whom 
you had it.' 'I have seen no papers, I made it 
up myself.' And that was the end of it. The 
count had the father fetched, but the fellow 
stuck to it. He was sent for trial and con- 
demned to hard labor, I believe. Now the fa- 
ther has come to intercede for him. But he's a 
good-for-nothing lad! You know that sort of 
tradesman's son, a dandy and lady-killer. He 
attended some lectures somewhere and imag- 
ines that the devil is no match for him. That's 
the sort of fellow he is. His father keeps a cook- 
shop here by the Stone Bridge, and you know 



WAR AND PEACE 



there was a large icon of God Almighty painted 
with a scepter in one hand and an orb in the 
other. Well, he took that icon home with him 
for a few days and what did he do? He found 
some scoundrel of a painter . . ." 

CHAPTER XI 

IN THE MIDDLE of this fresh talc Pierre was 
summoned to the commander in chief. 

When he entered the private room Count 
Rostopchin, puckering his face, was rubbing 
his forehead and eyes with his hand. A short 
man was saying something, but when Pierre 
entered he stopped speaking and went out. 

"Ah, how do you do, great warrior?" said 
Rostopchin as soon as the short man had left 
the room. "We have heard of your prowess. 
But that's not the point. Between ourselves, 
mon cher, do you belong to the Masons?" he 
went on severely, as though there were some- 
thing wrong about it which he nevertheless 
intended to pardon. Pierre remained silent. "I 
am well informed, my friend, but I am aware 
that there are Masons and Masons and I hope 
that you are not one of those who on pretense 
of saving mankind wish to ruin Russia." 

"Yes, I am a Mason," Pierre replied. 

"There, you see, mon cher! I expect you 
know that Messrs. Spcranski and Magnitski 
have been deported to their proper place. Mr. 
Klyucharev has been treated in the same way, 
and so have others who on the plea of building 
up the temple of Solomon have tried to de- 
stroy the temple of their fatherland. You can 
understand that there are reasons for this and 
that I could not have exiled the Postmaster 
had he not been a harmful person. It has now 
come to my knowledge that you lent him your 
carriage for his removal from town, and that 
you have even accepted papers from him for 
safe custody. I like you and don't wish you any 
harm and as you are only half my age I ad- 
vise you, as a father would, to cease all com- 
munication with men of that stamp and to 
leave here as soon as possible." 

"But what did Klyucharevdo wrong, Count?" 
asked Pierre. 

"That is for me to know, but not for you to 
ask," shouted Rostopchfn. 

"If he is accused of circulating Napoleon's 
proclamation it is not proved that he did so," 
said Pierre without looking at Rostopchfn, "and 
Vereshchdgin ..." 

"There we are!" Rostopchin shouted at 
Pierre louder than before, frowning suddenly. 
"Vereshch^gin is a renegade and a traitor who 



will be punished as he deserves," said he with 
the vindictive heat with which people speak 
when recalling an insult. "But I did not sum- 
mon you to discuss my actions, but to give you 
advice or an order if you prefer it. I beg you 
to leave the town and break off all communica- 
tion with such men as Klyucharev. And I will 
knock the nonsense outof anybody" but prob- 
ably rcali/ing that he was shouting at Beziik- 
hov who so far was not guilty of anything, he 
added, taking Pierre's hand in a friendly man- 
ner, "We arc on the eve of a public disaster 
and I haven't time to be polite to everybody 
who has business with me. My head is some- 
times in a whirl. Well, mon cher, what are you 
doing personally?" 

"Why, nothing," answered Pierre without 
raising his eyes or changing the thoughtful ex- 
pression of his face. 

The count frowned. 

"A word of friendly advice, mon cher. Be off 
as soon as you can, that's all I have to tell you. 
Happy he who has ears to hear. Good-by, my 
dear fellow. Oh, by the by! "he shouted through 
the doorway after Pierre, "is it true that the 
countess has fallen into the clutches of the 
holy fathers of the Society of Jesus?" 

Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchfn's 
room more sullen and angry than he had ever 
before shown himself. 

When he reached home it was already get- 
ting dark. Some eight people had come to see 
him that evening: thesecretary of a committee, 
the colonel of his battalion, his steward, his 
major-domo, and various petitioners. They all 
had business with Pierre and wanted decisions 
from him. Pierre did not understand and was 
not interested in any of these questions and 
only answered them in order to get rid of these 
people. When left alone at last he opened and 
read his wife's letter. 

"They, the soldiers at the battery, Prince 
Andrew killed . . . that old man . . . Simplicity 
is submission to God. Suffering is necessary . . . 
the meaning of all ... one must harness . . . 
my wife is getting married . . . One must for- 
get and understand . . ." And going to his bed 
he threw himself on it without undressing and 
immediately fell asleep. 

When he awoke next morning the major- 
domo came to inform him that a special mes- 
senger, a police officer, had come from Count 
Rostopchin to know whether Count Beziikhov 
had left or was leaving the town. 

A dozen persons who had business with 
Pierre were awaiting him in the drawing room. 



BOOK ELEVEN 



485 



Pierre dressed hurriedly and, instead of going 
to see them, went to the back porch and out 
through the gate. 

From that time till the end of the destruc- 
tion of Moscow no one of Beziikhov's house- 
hold, despite all the search they made, saw 
Pierre again or knew where he was. 

CHAPTER XII 

THE Ros'i6vs remained in Moscow till the first 
of September, that is, till the eve of the en- 
emy's entry into the city. 

After P(kya had joined Oboldnski's regi- 
ment of Cossacks and left for Belaya Tserkov 
where that regiment was forming, the countess 
was seized with terror. The thought that both 
her sons were at the war, had both gone from 
under her wing, that today or tomorrow either 
or both of them might be killed like the three 
sons of one of her acquaintances, struck her 
that summer for the first time with cruel clear- 
ness. She tried to get Nicholas back and wished 
to go herself to join P(kya, or to get him an ap- 
pointment somewhere in Petersburg, but nei- 
ther of these proved possible. Ptya could not 
return unless his regiment did so or unless he 
was transferred to another regiment on active 
service. Nicholas was somewhere with the army 
and had not sent a word since his last letter, in 
which he had given a detailed account of his 
meeting with Princess Mary. The countess did 
not sleep at night, or when she did fall asleep 
dreamed that she saw her sons lying dead. Aft- 
er many consultations and conversations, the 
count at last devised means to tranquillize her. 
He got Ptya transferred from Obolenski's regi- 
ment to Beziikhov's, which was in training 
near Moscow. Though Pd-tya would remain in 
the service, this transfer would give the coun- 
tess the consolation of seeing at least one of 
her sons under her wing, and she hoped to ar- 
range matters for her P(hya so as not to let him 
go again, but always get him appointed to 
places where he could not possibly take part 
in a battle. As long as Nicholas alone was in 
danger the countess imagined that she loved 
her first-born more than all her other children 
and even reproached herself for it; but when 
her youngest: the scapegrace who had been 
bad at lessons, was always breaking things in 
the house and making himself a nuisance to 
everybody, that snub-nosed Ptya with his 
merry black eyes and fresh rosy cheeks where 
soft down was just beginning to show when 
he was thrown amid those big, dreadful, cruel 
men who were fighting somewhere about some- 



thing and apparently finding pleasure in it- 
then his mother thought she loved him more, 
much more, than all her other children. The 
nearer the time came for Ptya to return, the 
more uneasy grew the countess. She began to 
think she would never live to see such happi- 
ness. The presence of Sonya, of her beloved 
Natasha, or even of her husband irritated her. 
"What do I want with them? I want no one 
but P6tya," she thought. 

At the end of August the Rost6vs received 
another letter from Nicholas. He wrote from 
the province ot Vor6nezh where he had been 
sent to procure remounts, but that letter did 
riot set the countess at ease. Knowing that one 
son was out of danger she became the more 
anxious about Ptya. 

Though by the twentieth of August nearly 
all the Rostovs' acquaintances had left Mos- 
cow, and though everybody tried to persuade 
the countess to get away as quickly as possible, 
.she would not hear of leaving before her treas- 
ure, her adored Pe*tya, returned. On the twenty- 
eighth of August he arrived. The passionate 
tenderness with which his mother received 
him did not please the sixteen-year-old officer. 
Though she concealed from him her intention 
of keeping him under her wing, Petya guessed 
her designs, and instinctively fearing that he 
might give way to emotion when with her 
might "become womanish" as he termed it to 
himselfhe treated her coldly, avoided her, 
and during his stay in Moscow attached him- 
self exclusively to Natasha for whom he had al- 
ways had a particularly brotherly tenderness, 
almost lover-like. 

Owing to the count's customary carelessness 
nothing was ready for their departure by the 
twenty-eighth of August and the carts that 
were to come from their Ryazdn and Moscow 
estates to remove their household belongings 
did not arrive till the thirtieth. 

From the twenty-eighth till the thirty- first 
all Moscow was in a bustle and commotion. 
Every day thousands of men wounded at Boro- 
din6 were brought in by the Dorogomilov gate 
and taken to various parts of Moscow, and 
thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants 
and their possessions out by the other gates. 
In spite of Rostopchfn's broadsheets, or be- 
cause of them or independently of them, the 
strangest and most contradictory rumors were 
current in the town. Some said that no one was 
to be allowed to leave the city, others on the 
contrary said that all the icons had been taken 
out of the churches and everybody was to be 



486 WAR AND 

ordered to leave. Some said there had been an- 
other battle after Borodino at which the French 
had been routed, while others on the contrary 
reported that the Russian army had been de- 
stroyed. Some talked about the Moscow militia 
which, preceded by the clergy, would go to the 
Three Hills; others whispered that Augustin * 
had been forbidden to leave, that traitors had 
been seized, that the peasants were rioting and 
robbing people on their way from Moscow, 
and so on. But all this was only talk; in reality 
(though the Council of Filf, at which it was 
decided to abandon Moscow, had not yet been 
held) both those who went away and those who 
remained behind felt, though they did not 
show it, that Moscow would certainly be aban- 
doned, and that they ought to get away as 
quickly as possible and save their belongings. 
It was felt that everything would suddenly 
break up and change, but up to the first of 
September nothing had done so. As a criminal 
who is being led to execution knows that he 
must die immediately, but yet looks about him 
and straightens the cap that is awry on his 
head, so Moscow involuntarily continued its 
wonted life, though it knew that the time of its 
destruction was near when the conditions of 
life to which its people were accustomed to 
submit would be completely upset. 

During the three days preceding the occupa- 
tion of Moscow the whole Rostov family was 
absorbed in various activities. The head of the 
family, Count Ilyd Rost6v, continually drove 
about the city collecting the current rumors 
from all sides and gave superficial and hasty 
orders at home about the preparations for their 
departure. 

The countess watched the things being 
packed, was dissatisfied with everything, was 
constantly in pursuit of Ptya who was always 
running away from her, and was jealous of 
Natisha with whom he spent all his time. S6n- 
ya alone directed the practical side of matters 
by getting things packed. But of late S6nya 
had been particularly sad and silent. Nicholas' 
letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary 
had elicited, in her presence, joyous comments 
from the countess, who saw an intervention of 
Providence in this meeting of the princess and 
Nicholas. 

"I was never pleased at Bolk6nski's engage- 
ment to Natdsha," said the countess, "but I al- 
ways wanted Nicholas to marry the princess, 
and had a presentiment that it would happen. 
What a good thing it would bel" 

1 Archbishop of Moscow. TR. 



PEACE 

S6nya felt that this was true: that the only 
possibility of retrieving the Rostovs' affairs was 
by Nicholas marrying a rich woman, and that 
the princess was a good match. It was very bit- 
ter for her. But despite her grief, or perhaps 
just because of it, she took on herself all the 
difficult work of directing the storingand pack- 
ing of their things and was busy for whole days. 
The count and countess turned to her when 
they had any orders to give. Ptya and Nata- 
sha on the contrary, far from helping their 
parents, were generally a nuisance and a hin- 
drance to everyone. Almost all day long the 
house resounded with their running feet, their 
cries, and their spontaneous laughter. They 
laughed and were gay not because there was 
any reason to laugh, but because gaiety and 
mirth were in their hearts and so everything 
that happened was a cause for gaiety and 
laughter to them. P&lt;hya was in high spirits be- 
cause having left home a boy he had returned 
(as everybody told him) a fine young man, be- 
cause he was at home, because he had left Be*- 
laya Tscrkov where there was no hope of soon 
taking part in a battle and had come to Mos- 
cow where there was to be fighting in a few 
days, and chiefly because Natdsha, whose lead 
he always followed, was in high spirits. Nata- 
sha was gay because she had been sad too long 
and now nothing reminded her of the cause of 
her sadness, and because she was feeling well. 
She was also happy because she had someone 
to adore her: the adoration of others was a 
lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to 
make them run freely and Pchya adored her. 
Above all, they were gay because there was a 
war near Moscow, there would be fighting at 
the town gates, arms were being given out, 
everybody was escaping going away some- 
where, and in general something extraordinary 
was happening, and that is always exciting, 
especially to the young. 

CHAPTER XIII 

ON SATURDAY, the thirty-first of August, every- 
thing in the Rost6vs' house seemed topsy-turvy. 
All the doors were open, all the furniture was 
being carried out or moved about, and the 
mirrors and pictures had been taken down. 
There were trunks in the rooms, and hay, 
wrapping paper, and ropes were scattered 
about. The peasants and house serfs carrying 
out the things were treading heavily on the 
parquet floors. The yard was crowded with 
peasant carts, some loaded high and already 
corded up, others still empty. 



BOOK ELEVEN 



487 



The voices and footsteps of the many serv- 
ants and of the peasants -who had come with 
the carts resounded as they shouted to one an- 
other in the yard and in the house. The count 
had been out since morning. The countess had 
a headache brought on by all the noise and 
turmoil and was lying down in the new sitting 
room with a vinegar compress on her head. 
Pdtya was not at home, he had gone to visit a 
friend with whom he meant to obtain a trans- 
fer from the militia to the active army. S6nya 
was in the ballroom looking after the packing 
of the glass and china. Natdsha was sitting on 
the floor of her dismantled room with dresses, 
ribbons, and scarves strewn all about her, gaz- 
ing fixedly at the floor and holding in her 
hands the old ball dress (already out of fash- 
ion) which she had worn at her first Petersburg 
ball. 

Natasha was ashamed of doing nothing when 
everyone else was so busy, and several times 
that morning had tried to set to work, but her 
heart was not in it, and she could not and did 
not know how to do anything except with all 
her heart and all her might. For a while she 
had stood beside S6nya while the china was 
being packed and tried to help, but soon gave 
it up and went to her room to pack her own 
things. At first she found it amusing to give 
away dresses and ribbons to the maids, but 
when that was done and what was left had still 
to be packed, she found it dull. 

"Dunydsha, you packl You will, won't you, 
dear?" And when Dunydsha willingly prom- 
ised to do it all for her, Natasha sat down on 
the floor, took her old ball dress, and fell into 
a reverie quite unrelated to what ought to 
have occupied her thoughts now. She was 
roused from her reverie by the talk of the maids 
in the next room (which was theirs) and by 
the sound of their hurried footsteps going to 
the back porch. Natdsha got up and looked 
out of the window. An enormously long row 
of carts full of wounded men had stopped in 
the street. 

The housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, 
coachmen, maids, footmen, postilions, and 
scullions stood at the gate, staring at the 
wounded. 

Natdsha, throwing a clean pocket handker- 
chief over her hair and holding an end of it in 
each hand, went out into the street. 

The former housekeeper, old Mdvra Kuz- 
minichna, had stepped out of the crowd by 
the gate, gone up to a cart with a hood con- 
structed of bast mats, and was speaking to a 



pale young officer who lay inside. Natdsha 
moved a few steps forward and stopped shyly, 
still holding her handkerchief, and listened to 
what the housekeeper was saying. 

"Then you have nobody in Moscow?" she 
was saying. "You would be more comfortable 
somewhere in a house ... in ours, for instance 
. . . the family are leaving." 

"I don't know if it would be allowed," re- 
plied the officer in a weak voice. "Here is our 
commanding officer . . . ask him," and he 
pointed to a stout major who was walking back 
along the street past the row of carts. 

Natdsha glanced with frightened eyes at the 
face of the wounded officer and at once went 
to meet the major. 

"May the wounded men stay in our house?" 
she asked. 

The major raised his hand to his cap with a 
smile. 

"Which one do you want, Ma'am'selle?"said 
he, screwing up his eyes and smiling. 

Natdsha quietly repeated her question, and 
her face and whole manner were so serious, 
though she was still holding the ends of her 
handkerchief, that the major ceased smiling 
and after some reflection as if considering in 
how far the thing was possiblereplied in the 
affirmative. 

"Oh yes, why not? They may," he said. 
With a slight inclination of her head, Natd- 
sha stepped back quickly to Mdvra Kuzminich- 
na, who stood talking compassionately to the 
officer. 

"They may. He says they mayl" whispered 
Natdsha. 

The cart in which the officer lay was turned 
into the Rostovs* yard, and dozens of carts 
with wounded men t&gt;egan at the invitation of 
the townsfolk ttf turn into the yards and to 
draw up at the entrances of the houses in Po- 
varskdya Street. Natdsha was evidently pleased 
to be dealing with new people outside the ordi- 
nary routine of her life. She and Mdvra Kuz- 
minichna tried to get as many of the wounded 
as possible into their yard. 

"Your Papa must be told, though," said Md- 
vra Kuzminichna. 

"Never mind, never mind, what does it mat- 
ter? For one day we can move into the draw- 
ing room. They can have all our half of the 
house." 

"There now, young lady, you do take things 
into your head! Even if we put them into the 
wing, the men's room, or the nurse's room, we 
must ask permission." 



488 

"Well, I'll ask." 

Natdsha ran into the house and went on tip- 
toe through the half-open door into the sitting 
room, where there was a smell of vinegar and 
Hoffman's drops. 1 

"Are you asleep, Mamma?" 

"Oh, what sleep?" said the countess, 
waking up just as she was dropping into a 
doze. 

"Mamma darlingl" said Natdsha, kneeling 
by her mother and bringing her face close to 
her mother's, "I am sorry, forgive me, I'll nev- 
er do it again; I woke you up! Mavra Kuzmfn- 
ichna has sent me: they have brought some 
wounded here officers. Will you let them 
come? They have nowhere to go. I knew you'd 
let them come . . ." she said quickly all in one 
breath. 

"What officers? Whom have they brought? I 
don't understand anything about it," said the 
countess. 

Natdsha laughed, and the countess too smiled 
slightly. 

"I knew you'd give permission ... so I'll tell 
them," and, having kissed her mother, Nata- 
sha got up and went to the door. 

In the hall she met her father, who had re- 
turned with bad news. 

"We've stayed too long! "said the count with 
involuntary vexation. "The Club is closed and 
the police are leaving." 

"Papa, is it all right I've invited some of 
the wounded into the house?" said Natdsha. 

"Of course it is," he answered absently. 
"That's not the point. I beg you not to indulge 
in trifles now, but to help to pack, and tomor- 
row we must go, go, go! . . ." 

And the count gave a similar order to the 
major-domo and the servants. 

At dinner Ptya having returned home told 
them the news he had heard. He said the peo- 
ple had been getting arms in the Kremlin, and 
that though Rostopchin's broadsheet had said 
that he would sound a call two or three days 
in advance, the order had certainly already 
been given for everyone to go armed to the 
Three Hills tomorrow, and that there would 
be a big battle there. 

The countess looked with timid horror at 
her son's eager, excited face as he said this. She 
realized that if she said a word about his not 
going to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the 
thought of the impending engagement) he 
would say something about men, honor, and 
the fatherland something senseless, masculine, 

1 A medicine much used in Russia. TR. 



WAR AND PEACE 

and obstinate which there would be no con- 
tradicting, and her plans would be spoiled; 
and so, hoping to arrange to leave before then 
and take Pe* tya with her as their protector and 
defender, she did not answer him, but after 
dinner called the count aside and implored 
him with tears to take her away quickly, that 
very night if possible. With a woman's invol- 
untary loving cunning she, who till then had 
not shown any alarm, said that she would die 
of fright if they did not leave that very night. 
Without any pretense she was now afraid of 
everything. 



CHAPTER XIV 

MADAME SCHOSS, who had been out to visit her 
daughter, increased the countess' fears still 
more by telling what she had seen at a spirit 
dealer's in Myasnftski Street. When returning 
by that street she had been unable to pass be- 
cause of a drunken crowd rioting in front of 
the shop. She had taken a cab and driven home 
by a side street and the cabman had told her 
that the people were breaking open the bar- 
rels at the drink store, having received orders 
to do so. 

After dinner the whole Rost6v household 
set to work with enthusiastic haste packing 
their belongings and preparing for their de- 
parture. The old count, suddenly setting to 
work, kept passing from the yard to the house 
and back again, shouting confused instructions 
to the hurrying people, and flurrying themstill 
more. Pctya directed things in the yard. S6nya, 
owing to the count's contradictory orders, lost 
her head and did not know what to do. The 
servants ran noisily about the house and yard, 
shouting and disputing. Natdsha, with the ar- 
dor characteristic of all she did, suddenly set 
to work too. At first her intervention in the 
business of packing was received skeptically. 
Everybody expected some prank from her and 
did not wish to obey her; but she resolutely 
and passionately demanded obedience, grew 
angry and nearly cried because they did not 
heed her, and at last succeeded in making them 
believe her. Her first exploit, which cost her 
immense effort and established her authority, 
was the packing of the carpets. The count had 
valuable Gobelin tapestries and Persian carpets 
in the house. When Natdsha set to work two 
cases were standing open in the ballroom, one 
almost full up with crockery, the other with 
carpets. There was also much china standing 
on the tables, and still more was being brought 



BOOK ELEVEN 

in from the storeroom. A third case was needed 
and servants had gone to fetch it. 

"S6nya, wait a bit we'll pack everything in- 
to these," said Natdsha. 

"You can't, Miss, we have tried to," said the 
butler's assistant. 

"No, wait a minute, please." 

And Natdsha began rapidly taking out of 
the case dishes and plates wrapped in paper. 

"The dishes must go in here among the car- 
pets," said she. 

"Why, it's a mercy if we can get the carpets 
alone into three cases," said the butler's assist- 
ant. 

"Oh, wait, please!" And Natdsha began 
rapidly and deftly sorting out the things. 
"These aren't needed," said she, putting aside 
some plates of Kiev ware. "These yes, these 
must go among the carpets," she said, referring 
to the Saxony china dishes. 

"Don't, Natdsha! Leave it alone! We'll get 
it all packed," urged S6nya reproachfully. 

"What a young lady she is!" remarked the 
major-domo. 

But Natdsha would not give in. She turned 
everything out and began quickly repacking, 
deciding that the inferior Russian carpets and 
unnecessary crockery should not be taken at 
all. When everything had been taken out of 
the cases, they recommenced packing, and it 
turned out that when the cheaper things not 
worth taking had nearly all been rejected, the 
valuable ones really did all go into the two 
cases. Only the lid of the case containing the 
carpets would not shut down. A few more 
things might have been taken out, but Natd- 
sha insisted on having her own way. She 
packed, repacked, pressed, made the butler's 
assistant and P^tya whom she had drawn in- 
to the business of packing press on the lid, 
and made desperate efforts herself. 

"That's enough, Natdsha," said S6nya. "I 
see you were right, but just take out the top 
one." 

"I won't!" cried Natdsha, with one hand 
holding back the hair that hung over her per- 
spiring face, while with the other she pressed 
down the carpets. "Now press, Pe'tya! Press, 
Vasflich, press hard!" she cried. 

The carpets yielded and the lid closed; Na- 
tdsha, clapping her hands, screamed with de- 
light and tears fell from her eyes. But this only 
lasted a moment. She at once set to work afresh 
and they now trusted her completely. The 
count was not angry even when they told him 
that Natdsha had countermanded an order of 



489 

his, and the servants now came to her to ask 
whether a cart was sufficiently loaded, and 
whether it might be corded up. Thanks to Na- 
tasha's directions the work now Tvent on ex- 
peditiously, unnecessary things were left, and 
the most valuable packed as compactly as pos- 
sible. 

But hard as they all worked till quite late 
that night, they could not get everything 
packed. The countess had fallen asleep and 
the count, having put off their departure till 
next morning, went to bed. 

S6nya and Natasha slept in the sitting room 
without undressing. 

That night another wounded man was 
driven down the Povarskdya, and Mdvra Kuz- 
mfnichna, who was standing at the gate, had 
him brought into the Rost6vs' yard. Mdvra 
Kuzminichna concluded that he w;is a very im- 
portant man. He was being conveyed in a ca- 
Idchevfitli a raised hood, and was quite covered 
by an apron. On the box beside the driver sat 
a venerable old attendant. A doctor and two 
soldiers followed the carriage in a cart. 

"Please come in here. The masters are going 
away and the whole house will be empty," said 
the old woman to the old attendant. 

"Well, perhaps," said he with a sigh. "We 
don't expect to get him home alive! We have 
a house of our own in Moscow, but it's a long 
way from here, and there's nobody living in 
it." 

"Do us the honor to come in, there's plenty 
of everything in the master's house. Come in," 
said Mdvra Kuzmfnichna. "Is he very ill?" she 
asked. 

The attendant made a hopeless gesture. 

"We don't expect to get him home! We must 
ask the doctor." 

And the old servant got down from the box 
and went up to the cart. 

"All right!" said the doctor. 

The old servant returned to the cal&amp;che, 
looked into it, shook his head disconsolately, 
told the driver to turn into the yard, and 
stopped beside Mdvra Kuzminichna. 

"O, Lord Jesus Christ!" she murmured. 

She invited them to take the wounded man 
into the house. 

"The masters won't object . . ." she said. 

But they had to avoid carrying the man up- 
stairs, and so they took him into the wing and 
put him in the room that had been Madame 
Schoss'. 

This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bol- 
k6nski. 



49&lt;&gt; 



WAR AND PEACE 



CHAPTER XV 

Moscow's LAST DAY had come. It was a clear 
bright autumn day, a Sunday. The church bells 
everywhere were ringing for service, just as 
usual on Sundays. Nobody seemed yet to re- 
alize what awaited the city. 

Only two things indicated the social condi- 
tion of Moscow the rabble, that is the poor 
people, and the price of commodities. An 
enormous crowd of factory hands, house serfs, 
and peasants, with whom some officials, semi- 
narists, and gentry were mingled, had gone 
early that morning to the Three Hills. Having 
waited there for Rostopchfn who did not turn 
up, they became convinced that Moscow would 
be surrendered, and then dispersed all about 
the town to the public houses and cookshops. 
Prices too that day indicated the state of af- 
fairs. The price of weapons, of gold, of carts 
and horses, kept rising, but the value of paper 
money and city articles kept falling, so that 
by midday there were instances of carters re- 
moving valuable goods, such as cloth, and re- 
ceiving in payment a half of what they carted, 
while peasant horses were fetching five hun- 
dred rubles each, and furniture, mirrors, and 
bronzes were being given away for nothing. 

In the Rostovs' staid old-fashioned house the 
dissolution of former conditions of life was but 
little noticeable. As to the serfs the only indi- 
cation was that three out of their huge retinue 
disappeared during the night, but nothing was 
stolen; and as to the value of their possessions, 
the thirty peasant carts that had come in from 
their estates and which many people envied 
proved to be extremely valuable and they were 
offered enormous sums of money for them. 
Not only were huge sums offered for the horses 
and carts, but on the previous evening and 
early in the morning of the first of September, 
orderlies and servants sent by wounded officers 
came to the Rost6vs' yard, and wounded men 
dragged themselves there from the Rost6vs' 
and from neighboring houses where they were 
accommodated, entreating the servants to try 
to get them a lift out of Moscow. The major- 
domo to whom these en treaties were addressed, 
though he was sorry for the wounded, resolute- 
ly refused, saying that he dare not even men- 
tion the matter to the count. Pity these wound- 
ed men as one might, it was evident that if 
they were given one cart there would be no 
reason to refuse another, or all the carts and 
one's own carriages as well. Thirty carts could 
not save all the wounded and in the general 
catastrophe one could not disregard oneself and 



one's own family. So thought the major-domo 
on his master's behalf. 

On waking up that morning Count Ilyd Ros- 
t6v left his bedroom softly, so as not to wake 
the countess who had fallen asleep only toward 
morning, and came out to the porch in his 
lilac silk dressing gown. In the yard stood the 
carts ready corded. The carriages were at the 
front porch. The major-domo stood at the porch 
talking to an elderly orderly and to a pale 
young officer with a bandaged arm. On seeing 
the count the major-domo made a significant 
and stern gesture to them both to go away. 

"Well, Vasflich, is everything ready?" asked 
the count, and stroking his bald head he looked 
good-naturedly at the officer and the orderly 
and nodded to them. (He liked to see new 
faces.) 

"We can harness at once, your excellency." 

"Well, that's right. As soon as the countess 
wakes we'll be off, God willing! What is it, 
gentlemen?" he added, turning to the officer. 
"Are you staying in my house?" 

The officer came nearer and suddenly his face 
flushed crimson. 

"Count, be so good as to allow me . . . for 
God's sake, to get into some corner of one of 
your carts I I have nothing here with me. ... I 
shall be all right on a loaded cart " 

Before the officer had finished speaking the 
orderly made the same request on behalf of 
his master. 

"Oh, yes, yes, yes!" said the count hastily. "I 
shall be very pleased, very pleased. Vasilich, 
you'll see to it. Just unload one or two carts. 
Well, what of it ... do what's necessary . . ." 
said the count, muttering some indefinite or- 
der. 

But at the same moment an expression of 
warm gratitude on the officer's face had al- 
ready sealed the order. The count looked 
around him. In the yard, at the gates, at the 
window of the wings, wounded officers and 
their orderlies were to be seen. They were all 
looking at the count and moving toward the 
porch. 

"Please step into the gallery, your excel- 
lency," said the major-domo. "What are your 
orders about the pictures?" 

The count went into the house with him, 
repeating his order not to refuse the wounded 
who asked for a lift. 

"Well, never mind, some of the things can 
be unloaded," he added in a soft, confidential 
voice, as though afraid of being overheard. 

At nine o'clock the countess woke up, and 



BOOK 

Matrena Timoteevna, who had been her lady's 
maid before her marriage and now performed 
a sort of chief gendarme's duty for her, came 
to say that Madame Schoss was much offended 
and the young ladies' summer dresses could 
not be left behind. On inquiry, the countess 
learned that Madame Schoss was offended be- 
cause her trunk had been taken down from 
its cart, and all the loads were being uncorded 
and the luggage taken out of the carts to make 
room for wounded men whom the count in the 
simplicity of his heart had ordered that they 
should take with them. The countess sent for 
her husband. 

"What is this, my dear? I hear that the lug- 
gage is being unloaded/' 

"You know, love, I wanted to tell you . . . 
Countess dear ... an officer came to me to ask 
for a few carts for the wounded. After all, ours 
are things that can be bought but think what 
being left behind means to them! . . . Really 
now, in our own yardwe asked them in our- 
selves and there are officers among them. . . . 
You know, I think, my dear ... let them be 
taken . . . where's the hurry?" 

The count spoke timidly, as he always did 
when talking of money matters. The countess 
was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of 
news of something detrimental to the chil- 
dren's interests, such as the building of a new 
gallery or conservatory, the inauguration of a 
private theater or an orchestra. She was accus- 
tomed always to oppose anything announced 
in that timid tone and considered it her duty 
to do so. 

She assumed her dolefully submissive man- 
ner and said to her husband: ''Listen to me, 
Count, you have managed matters so that we 
are getting nothing for the house, and now you 
wish to throw away all our all the children's 
property 1 You said yourself that we have a 
hundred thousand rubles' worth of things in 
the house. I don't consent, my dear, I don't! Do 
as you please! It's the government's business to 
look after the wounded; they know that. Look 
at the Lopukhfns opposite, they cleared out 
everything two days ago. That's what other peo- 
ple do. It's only we who are such fools. If you 
have no pity on me, have some for the chil- 
dren." 

Flourishing his arms in despair the count 
left the room without replying. 

"Papa, what are you doing that for?" asked 
Natasha, who had followed him into her 
mother's room. 

"Nothing! What business is it of yours?" 



ELEVEN 491 

muttered the count angrily. 

"But I heard," said Natdsha. "Why does 
Mamma object?" 

"What business is it of yours?" cried the 
count. 

Natdsha stepped up to the window and pon- 
dered. 

"Papa! Here's Berg coming to see us," said 
she, looking out of the window. 

CHAPTER XVI 

BERG, the Rost6vs' son-in-law, was already a 
colonel wearing the orders of Vladimir and 
Anna, and he still filled the quiet and agree- 
able post of assistant to the head of the staff of 
the assistant commander of the first division 
of the Second Army. 

On the first of September he had come to 
Moscow from the army. 

He had nothing to do in Moscow, but he had 
noticed that everyone in the army was asking 
for leave to visit Moscow and had something 
to do there. So he considered it necessary to 
ask for leave of absence for family and domes- 
tic reasons. 

Berg drove up to his father-in-law's house 
in his spruce little trap with a pair of sleek 
roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. He 
looked attentively at the carts in the yard and 
while going up to the porch took out a clean 
pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it. 

From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth 
though impatient steps into the drawing room, 
where he embraced the count, kissed the hands 
of Natdsha and S6nya, and hastened to inquire 
after "Mamma's" health. 

"Health, at a time like this?" said the count. 
"Come, tell us the news! Is the army retreating 
or will there be another battle?" 

"God Almighty alone can decide the fate of 
our fatherland, Papa," said Berg. "The army 
is burning with a spirit of heroism and the 
leaders, so to say, have now assembled in coun- 
cil. No one knows what is coming. But in gen- 
eral I can tell you, Papa, that such a heroic 
spirit, the truly antique valor of the Russian 
army, which they which it" (he corrected 
himself) "has shown or displayed in the battle 
of the twenty-sixththere are no words worthy 
to do it justice! I tell you, Papa" (he smote 
himself on the breast as a general he had heard 
speaking had done, but Berg did it a trifle late 
for he should have struck his breast at the words 
"Russian army"), "I tell you frankly that we, 
the commanders, far from having to urge the 
men on or anything of that kind, could hardly 



49* 



restrain those . . . those . . . yes, those exploits 
of antique valor," he went on rapidly. "Gen- 
eral Barclay de Tollyrisked his life everywhere 
at the head of the troops, I can assure you. Our 
corps was stationed on a hillside. You can im- 
agine!" 

And Berg related all that he remembered of 
the various talcs he had heard those days. Na- 
tdsha watched him with an intent gaze that 
confused him, as if she were trying to find in 
his face the answer to some question. 

"Altogether such heroism as was displayed 
by the Russian warriors cannot be imagined or 
adequately praised! "said Berg, glancing round 
at Natasha, and as if anxious to conciliate her, 
replying to her intent look with a smile. " 'Rus- 
sia is not in Moscow, she lives in the hearts of 
her sons!' Isn't it so, Papa?" said he. 

Just then the countess came in from the sit- 
ting room with a weary and dissatisfied expres- 
sion. Berg hurriedly jumped up, kissed her 
hand, asked about her health, and, swaying his 
head from side to side to express sympathy, re- 
mained standing beside her. 

"Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these 
are hard and sad times for every Russian. But 
why are you so anxious? You have still time to 
get away. . . ." 

"I can't think what the servants are about," 
said the countess, turning to her husband. "I 
have just been told that nothing is ready yet. 
Somebody after all must see to things. One 
misses Mitenka at such times. There won't be 
any end to it." 

The count was about to say something, but 
evidently restrained himself. He got up from 
his chair and went to the door. 

At that moment Berg drew out his handker- 
chief as if to blow his nose and, seeing the knot 
in it, pondered, shaking his head sadly and sig- 
nificantly. 

"And I have a great favor to ask of you, Pa- 
pa," said he. 

"Hm . . ." said the count, and stopped. 

"I was driving past Yusupov's house just 
now," said Berg with a laugh, "when the stew- 
ard, a man I know, ran out and asked me 
whether I wouldn't buy something. I went in 
out of curiosity, you know, and there is a small 
chiffonier and a dressing table. You know how 
dear Ve"ra wanted a chiffonier like that and 
how we had a dispute about it." (At the men- 
tion of the chiffonier and dressing table Berg 
involuntarily changed his tone to one of pleas- 
ure at his admirable domestic arrangements.) 
"And it's such a beautyl It pulls out and has 



WAR AND PEACE 

a secret English drawer, you know! And dear 
Vera has long wanted one. I wish to give her a 
surprise, you see. I saw so many of those peas- 
ant carts in your yard. Please let me have one, 
I will pay the man well, and . , ." 

The count frowned and coughed. 

"Ask the countess, I don't give orders." 

"If it's inconvenient, please don't," said 
Berg. "Only I so wanted it, for dear Wra's 
sake." 

"Oh, go to the devil, all of you! To the devil, 
the devil, the devil . . . !" cried the old count. 
"My head's in a whirl!" 

And he left the room. The countess began to 
cry. 

"Yes, Mammal Yes, these are very hard 
times!" said Berg. 

Natdsha left the room with her father and, 
as if finding it difficult to reach some decision, 
first followed him and then ran downstairs. 

Petya was in the porch, engaged in giving 
out weapons to the servants who were to leave 
Moscow. The loaded carts were still standing 
in the yard. Two of them had been uncorded 
and a wounded officer was climbing into one 
of them helped by an orderly. 

"Do you know what it's about?" Pdtya asked 
Natasha. 

She understood that he meant what were 
their parents quarreling about. She did not 
answer. 

"It's because Papa wanted to give up all the 
carts to the wounded," said Pdtya. "Vasilich 
told me. I consider . . ." 

"I consider," Natdsha suddenly almost shout- 
ed, turning her angry face to Petya,"! consider 
it so horrid, so abominable, so ... I don't know 
what. Are we despicable Germans?" 

Her throat quivered with convulsive sobs 
and, afraid of weakening and letting the force 
of her anger run to waste, she turned and 
rushed headlong up the stairs. 

Berg was sitting beside the countess consol- 
ing her with the respectful attention of a rela- 
tive. The count, pipe in hand, was pacing up 
and down the room, when Natasha, her face 
distorted by anger, burst in like a tempest and 
approached her mother with rapid steps. 

"It's horrid! It's abominable!" she screamed. 
"You can't possibly have ordered it!" 

Berg and the countess looked at her, per- 
plexed and frightened. The count stood still 
at the window and listened. 

"Mamma, it's impossible: see what is going 
on in the yard I" she cried. "They will be 
left! . . ." 



BOOK ELEVEN 
you? Who are 



493 



"What's the matter with 
'they'? What do you want?" 

"Why, the wounded! It's impossible, Mam- 
ma. It's monstrous! . . . No, Mamma darling, 
it's not the thing. Please forgive me, darling. 
. . . Mamma, what does it matter what we take 
away? Only look what is going on in the yard 
. . . Mamma! . . . It's impossible!" 

The count stood by the window and listened 
without turning round. Suddenly he sniffed 
and put his face closer to the window. 

The countess glanced at her daughter, saw 
her face full of shame for her mother, saw her 
agitation, and understood why her husband 
did not turn to look at her now, and she glanced 
round quite disconcerted. 

"Oh, do as you like! Am I hindering any- 
one?" she said, not surrendering at once. 

"Mamma, darling, forgive me!" 

But the countess pushed her daughter away 
and went up to her husband. 

"My dear, you order what is right. . . . You 
know I don't understand about it," said she, 
dropping her eyes shamefacedly. 

"The eggs . . . the eggs are teaching the hen 
. . ." muttered the count through tears of joy, 
and he embraced his wife who was glad to hide 
her look of shame on his breast. 

"Papa! Mamma! May I see to it? May I? 
. . ." asked Natdsha. "We will still take all the 
most necessary things." 

The count nodded affirmatively, and Na- 
tdsha, at the rapid pace at which she used to 
run when playing at tag, ran through the ball- 
room to the anteroom and downstairs into the 
yard. 

The servants gathered round Natdsha, but 
could not believe the strange order she brought 
them until the count himself, in his wile's 
name, confirmed the order to give up all the 
carts to the wounded and take the trunks to the 
storerooms. When they understood that order 
the servants set to work at this new task with 
pleasure and zeal. It no longer seemed strange 
to them but on the contrary it seemed the only 
thing that could be done, just as a quarter of 
an hour before it had not seemed strange to 
anyone that the wounded should be left be- 
hind and the goods carted away but that had 
seemed the only thing to do. 

The whole household, as if to atone for not 
having done it sooner, set eagerly to work at 
the new task of placing the wounded in the 
carts. The wounded dragged themselves out of 
their rooms and stood with pale but happy 
faces round the carts. The news that carts were 



to be had spread to the neighboring houses, 
from which wounded men began to come into 
the Rost6vs' yard. Many of the wounded 
asked them not to unload the carts but only to 
let them sit on the top of the things. But the 
work of unloading, once started, could not be 
arrested. It seemed not to matter whether all 
or only half the things were left behind. Cases 
full of china, bronzes, pictures, and mirrors 
that had been so carefully packed the night 
before now lay about the yard, and still they 
went on searching for and finding possibili- 
ties of unloading this or that and letting the 
wounded have another and yet another cart. 

"We can take four more men," said the 
steward. "They can have my trap, or else what 
is to become of them?" 

"Let them have my wardrobe cart," said the 
countess. "Dunyasha can go with me in the 
carriage." 

They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent 
it to take wounded men from a house two 
doors off. The whole household, servants in- 
cluded, was bright and animated. Natdsha was 
in a state of rapturous excitement such as she 
had not known for a long time. 

"What could we fasten this onto?" asked the 
servants, trying to fix a trunk on the narrow 
footboard behind a carriage. "We must keep 
at least one cart." 

"What's in it?" asked Natasha. 

"The count's books." 

"Leave it, Vasilich will put it away. It's not 
wanted." 

The phaeton was full of people and there 
was a doubt as to where Count Peter could sit. 

"On the box. You'll sit on the box, won't you, 
Ptya?" cried Natdsha. 

S6nya too was busy all this time, but the aim 
of her efforts was quite different from Natd- 
sha's. She was putting away the things that had 
to be left behind and making a list of them as 
the countess wished, and she tried to get as 
much taken away with them as possible. 

CHAPTER XVII 

BEFORE TWO O'CLOCK in the afternoon the Ros- 
t6vs' four carriages, packed full and with the 
horses harnessed, stood at the front door. One 
by one the carts with the wounded had moved 
out of the yard. 

The caliche in which Prince Andrew was be- 
ing taken attracted S6nya's attention as it passed 
the front porch. With the help of a maid she 
was arranging a seat for the countess in the 
huge high coach that stood at the entrance. 



494 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Whose caleche is that?" she inquired, lean- 
ing out of the carriage window. 

"Why, didn't you know, Miss?" replied the 
maid. "The wounded prince: he spent the 
night in our house and is going with us." 

"But who is it? What's his name?" 

"It's our intended that was Prince Bolk6n- 
ski himself! They say he is dying," replied the 
maid with a sigh. 

S6nya jumped out of the coach and ran to 
the countess. The countess, tired out and al- 
ready dressed in shawl and bonnet for her 
journey, was pacing up and down the drawing 
room, waiting for the household to assemble 
for the usual silent prayer with closed doors 
before starting. Natdsha was not in the room. 

"Mamma," said S6nya, "Prince Andrew is 
here, mortally wounded. He is going with us." 

The countess opened her eyes in dismay and, 
seizing S6nya's arm, glanced around. 

"Natasha?" she murmured. 

At that moment this news had only one sig- 
nificance for both of them. They knew their 
Natdsha, and alarm as to what would happen 
if she heard this news stifled all sympathy for 
the man they both liked. 

"Natdsha does not know yet, but he is go- 
ing with us," said S6nya. 

"You say he is dying?" 

S6nya nodded. 

The countess put her arms around S6nya 
and began to cry. 

"The ways of God are past finding out!" she 
thought, feeling that the Almighty Hand, 
hitherto unseen, was becoming manifest in all 
that was now taking place. 

"Well, Mamma? Everything is ready. What's 
the matter?" asked Natdsha, as with animated 
face she ran into the room. 

"Nothing," answered the countess. "If ev- 
erything is ready let us start." 

And the countess bent over her reticule to 
hide her agitated face. S6nya embraced Na- 
tsha and kissed her. 

Natdsha looked at her inquiringly. 

"What is it? What has happened?" 

"Nothing . . . No . . ." 

"Is it something very bad for me? What is 
it?" persisted Natdsha with her quick intuition. 

Sonya sighed and made no reply. The 
count, Pdtya, Madame Schoss, Mdvra Kuzmf- 
nichna, and Vasflich came into the drawing 
room and, having closed the doors, they all 
sat down and remained for some moments 
silently seated without looking at one an- 
other. 



The count was the first to rise, and with a 
loud sigh crossed himself before the icon. All 
the others did the same. Then the count em- 
braced Mdvra Kuzmfnichna and Vasflich, who 
were to remain in Moscow, and while they 
caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he 
patted their backs lightly with some vaguely 
affectionate and comforting words. The count- 
ess went into the oratory and there S6nya found 
her on her knees before the icons that had been 
left here and there hanging on the wall. (The 
most precious ones, with which some family 
tradition was connected, were being taken with 
them.) 

In the porch and in the yard the men whom 
Ptya had armed with swords and daggers, with 
trousers tucked inside their high boots and 
with belts and girdles tightened, were taking 
leave of those remaining behind. 

As is always the case at a departure, much 
had been forgotten or put in the wrong place, 
and for a long time two menservants stood one 
on each side of the open door and the carnage 
steps waiting to help the countess in, while 
maids rushed with cushions and bundles from 
the house to the carriages, the caleche, the pha- 
eton, and back again. 

"They always will forget every thingl" said 
the countess. "Don't you know I can't sit like 
that?" 

And Dunyasha, with clenched teeth, with- 
out replying but with an aggrieved look on her 
face, hastily got into the coach to rearrange the 
seat. 

"Oh, those servants!" said the count, sway- 
ing his head. 

Efim, the old coachman, who was the only 
one the countess trusted to drive her, sat 
perched up high on the box and did not so 
much as glance round at what was going on be- 
hind him. From thirty years' experience he 
knew it would be some time yet before the or- 
der, "Be off, in God's name!" would be given 
him: and he knew that even when it was said 
he would be stopped once or twice more while 
they sent back to fetch something that had 
been forgotten, and even after that he would 
again be stopped and the countess herself 
would lean out of the window and beg him 
for the love of heaven to drive carefully down 
the hill. He knew all this and therefore waited 
calmly for what would happen, with more pa- 
tience than the horses, especially the near one, 
the chestnut Falcon, who was pawing the 
ground and champing his bit. At last all were 
seated, the carriage steps were folded and 



BOOK ELEVEN 



495 



pulled up, the door was shut, somebody was 
sent for a traveling case, and the countess 
leaned out and said what she had to say. Then 
Efim deliberately doffed his hat and began 
crossing himself. The postilion and all the oth- 
er servants did the same. "Off, in God's name!" 
said Efim, putting on his hat. "Start!" The 
postilion started the horses, the off pole horse 
tugged at his collar, the high springs creaked, 
and the body of the coach swayed. The foot- 
man sprang onto the box of the moving coach 
which jolted as it passed out of the yard onto 
the uneven roadway; the other vehicles jolted 
in their turn, and the procession of carriages 
moved up the street. In the carriages, the cale- 
che f and the phaeton, all crossed themselves as 
they passed the church opposite the house. 
Those who were to remain in Moscow walked 
on either side of the vehicles seeing the trav- 
elers off. 

Rarely had Natasha experienced so joyful a 
feeling as now, sitting in the carriage beside 
the countess and gazing at the slowly receding 
walls of forsaken, agitated Moscow. Occasion- 
ally she leaned out of the carriage window and 
looked back and then forward at the long train 
of wounded in front of them. Almost at the 
head of the line she could see the raised hood 
of Prince Andrew's caliche. She did not know 
who was in it, but each time she looked at the 
procession her eyes sought that caleche. She 
knew it was right in front. 

In Kiidrino, from the Nikftski, Prdsnya, and 
Podnovinsk Streets came several other trains 
of vehicles similar to the Rost6vs', and as they 
passed along the Sad6vaya Street the carriages 
and carts formed two rows abreast. 

As they were going round the Siikharev wa- 
ter tower Natasha, who was inquisitively and 
alertly scrutinizing the people driving or walk- 
ing past, suddenly cried out in joyful surprise: 

"Dear me! Mamma, S6nya, look, it's he!" 

"Who? Who?" 

"Look! Yes, on my word, it's Bezukhov!" 
said Natdsha, putting her head out of the car- 
riage and staring at a tall, stout man in a coach- 
man's long coat, who from his manner of walk- 
ing and moving was evidently a gentleman in 
disguise, and who was passing under the arch 
of the Siikharev tower accompanied by a small, 
sallow-faced, beardless old man in a frieze coat. 

"Yes, it really is Bezukhov in a coachman's 
coat, with a queer-looking old boy. Really," 
said Natdsha, "look, lookl" 

"No, it's not he. How can you talk such non- 
sense?" 



"Mamma," screamed Natdsha, "I'll stake my 
head it's he! I assure you! Stop, stop!" she cried 
to the coachman. 

But the coachman could not stop, for from 
the Meshchdnski Street came more carts and 
carriages, and the Rost6vs were being shouted 
at to move on and not block the way. 

In fact, however, though now much farther 
off than before, the Rost6vs all saw Pierre or 
someone extraordinarily like him in a coach- 
man's coat, going down the street with head 
bent and a serious face beside a small, beard- 
less old man who looked like a footman. That 
old man noticed a face thrust out of the car- 
riage window gazing at them, and respectfully 
touching Pierre's elbow said something to him 
and pointed to the carriage. Pierre, evidently 
engrossed in thought, could not at first under- 
stand him. At length when he had understood 
and looked in the direction the old man indi- 
cated, he recognized Natdsha, and following 
his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly 
toward the coach. But having taken a dozen 
steps he seemed to remember something and 
stopped. 

Natdsha's face, leaning out of the window, 
beamed with quizzical kindliness. 

"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have rec- 
ognized you! This is wonderful!" she cried, 
holding out her hand to him. "What are you 
doing? Why are you like this?" 

Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed 
it awkwardly as he walked along beside her 
while the coach still moved on. 

"What is the matter, Count?" asked the 
countess in a surprised and commiserating 
tone. 

"What? What? Why? Don't ask me," said 
Pierre, and looked round at Natdsha whose 
radiant, happy expression of which he was 
conscious without looking at her filled him 
with enchantment. 

"Are you remaining in Moscow, then?" 

Pierre hesitated. 

"In Moscow?" he said in a questioning tone. 
"Yes, in Moscow. Goodby!" 

"Ah, if only I were a man! I'd certainly stay 
with you. How splendid!"said Natdsha. "Mam- 
ma, if you'll let me, I'll stay!" 

Pierre glanced absently at Natdsha and was 
about to say something, but the countess inter- 
rupted him. 

"You were at the battle, we heard." 

"Yes, I was," Pierre answered. "There will 
be another battle tomorrow . . ." he began, but 
Natdsha interrupted him. 



WAR AND PEACE 



"But what is the matter with you, Count? 
You are not like yourself. . . ." 

"Oh, don't ask me, don't ask me! I don't 
know myself. Tomorrow . . . But no! Good-by, 
good-byl" he muttered. "It's an awful time!" 
and dropping behind the carriage he stepped 
onto the pavement. 

Natdsha continued to lean out of the win- 
dow for a long time, beaming at him with her 
kindly, slightly quizzical, happy smile. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

FOR THE LASTTWO DAYS, ever since leavinghome, 
Pierre had been living in the empty house of 
his deceased benefactor, Bazddev. This is how 
it happened. 

When he woke up on the morning after his 
return to Moscow and his interview with 
Count Rostopchfn, he could not for some time 
make out where he was and what was expected 
of him. When he was informed that among 
others awaiting him in his reception room 
there was a Frenchman who had brought a let- 
ter from his wife, the Countess Hellene, he felt 
suddenly overcome by that sense of confusion 
and hopelessness to which he was apt to suc- 
cumb. He felt that everything was now at an 
end, all was in confusion and crumbling to 
pieces, that nobody was right or wrong, the 
future held nothing, and there was no escape 
from this position. Smiling unnaturally and 
muttering to himself, he first sat down on the 
sofa in an attitude of despair, then rose, went 
to the door of the reception room and peeped 
through the crack, returned flourishing his 
arms, and took up a book. His major-domo 
came in a second time to say that the French- 
man who had brought the letter from the 
countess was very anxious to see him if only 
for a minute, and that someone from Bazdev's 
widow had called to ask Pierre to take charge 
of her husband's books, as she herself was leav- 
ing for the country. 

"Oh, yes, in a minute; wait ... or no! No, of 
course ... go and say I will come directly/' 
Pierre replied to the major-domo. 

But as soon as the man had left the room 
Pierre took up his hat which was lying on the 
table and went out of his study by the other 
door. There was no one in the passage. He 
went along the whole length of this passage to 
the stairs and, frowning and rubbing his fore- 
head with both hands, went down as far as the 
first landing. The hall porter was standing at 
the front door. From the landing where Pierre 
stood there was a second staircase leading to 



the back entrance. He went down that stair- 
case and out into the yard. No one had seen 
him. But there were some carriages waiting, 
and as soon as Pierre stepped out of the gate 
the coachmen and the yard porter noticed him 
and raised their caps to him. When he felt he 
was being looked at he behaved like an ostrich 
which hides its head in a bush in order not to 
be seen: he hung his head and quickening his 
pace went down the street. 

Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day 
the sorting of Joseph Bazd^ev's books and 
papers appeared to him the most necessary. 

He hired the first cab he met and told the 
driver to go to the Patriarch's Ponds, where 
the widow Bazdev's house was. 

Continually turning round to look at the 
rows of loaded carts that were making their 
way from all sides out of Moscow, and balanc- 
ing his bulky body so as not to slip out ^f the 
ramshackle old vehicle, Pierre, experiencing 
the joyful feeling of a boy escaping from school, 
began to talk to his driver. 

The man told him that arms were being dis- 
tributed today at the Krdmlin and that tomor- 
row everyone would be sent out beyond the 
Three Hills gates and a great battle would be 
fought there. 

Having reached the Patriarch's Ponds Pierre 
found the Bazddevs' house, where he had not 
been for a long time past. He went up to the 
gate. Gerasim, that sallow beardless old man 
Pierre had seen at Torzh6k five years before 
with Joseph Ba/dcev, came out in answer to 
his knock. 

"At home?" asked Pierre. 

"Owing to the present state of things Sophia 
Danilovna has gone to theTorzhok estate with 
the children, your excellency." 

"I will come in all the same, I have to look 
through the books," said Pierre. 

"Be so good as to step in. Makar Alex^evich, 
the brother of my late master may the king- 
dom of heaven be his has remained here, but 
he is in a weak state as you know," said the old 
servant. 

Pierre knew that Makar Alex^evich was 
Joseph Bazddev's half-insane brother and a 
hard drinker. 

"Yes, yes, I know. Let us go in . . ." said 
Pierre and entered the house. 

A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, 
wearing a dressing gown and with galoshes on 
his bare feet, stood in the anteroom. On seeing 
Pierre he muttered something angrily and 
went away along the passage. 



BOOK ELEVEN 

"He was a very clever man but has now 
grown quite feeble, as your honor sees," said 
Gerasim. "Will you step into the study?" Pierre 
nodded. "As it was sealed up so it has remained, 
but Sophia Danilovna gave orders that if any- 
one should come from you they were to have 
the books." 

Pierre went into that gloomy study which he 
had entered with such trepidation in his bene- 
factor's lifetime. The room, dusty and un- 
touched since the death of Joseph Bazd^ev, was 
now even gloomier. 

Gerdsim opened one of the shutters and left 
the room on tiptoe. Pierre went round the 
study, approached the cupboard in which the 
manuscripts were kept, and took out what had 
once been one of the most important, the holy 
of holies of the order. This was the authentic 
Scotch Acts with Bazdev's notes and explana- 
tion.. He sat down at the dusty writing table, 
and, having laid the manuscripts before him, 
opened them out, closed them, finally pushed 
them away, and resting his head on his hand 
sank into meditation. 

Gerdsim looked cautiously into the study 
several times and saw Pierre always sitting in 
the same attitude. 

More than two hours passed and Gerasim 
took the liberty of making a slight noise at the 
door to attract his attention, but Pierre did 
not hear him. 

"Is the cabman to be discharged, your hon- 
or?" 

"Oh yes!" said Pierre, rousing himself and 
rising hurriedly. "Look here," he added, tak- 
ing Gerasim by a button of his coat and look- 
ing down at the old man with moist, shining, 
and ecstatic eyes, "I say, do you know that 
there is going to be a battle tomorrow?" 

"We heard so," replied the man. 

"I beg you not to tell anyone who I am, and 
to do what I ask you." 

"Yes, your excellency," replied Gerasim. 
"Will you have something to eat?" 

"No, but I want something else. I want peas- 
ant clothes and a pistol," said Pierre, unex- 
pectedly blushing. 

"Yes, your excellency," said Gcrdsim after 
thinking for a moment. 

All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in 
his benefactor's study, and Gerasim heard him 
pacing restlessly from one corner to another 
and talking to himself. And he spent the night 
on a bed made up for him there. 

Gerasim, being a servant who in his time 
had seen many strange things, accepted Pierre's 



497 

taking up his residence in the house without 
surprise, and seemed pleased to have someone 
to wait on. That same eveningwithout even 
asking himself what they were wanted for he 
procured a coachman's coat and cap for Pierre, 
and promised to get him the pistol next day. 
Makar Alex^evich came twice that evening 
shuffling along in his galoshes as far as the 
door and stopped and looked ingratiatingly at 
Pierre. But as soon as Pierre turned toward 
him he wrapped his dressing gown around him 
with a shamefaced and angry look and hurried 
away. It was when Pierre (wearing the coach- 
man's coat which Gerdsim had procured for 
him and had disinfected by steam) was on his 
way with the old man to buy the pistol at the 
Siikharev market that he met the Rost6vs. 

CHAPTER XIX 

KUTUZOV'S ORDER to retreat through Moscow 
to the Ryazan road was issued at night on the 
first of September. 

The first troops started at once, and during 
the night they marched slowly and steadily 
without hurry. At daybreak, however, those 
nearing the town at the Dorogomilov bridge 
saw ahead of them masses of soldiers crowding 
and hurrying across the bridge, ascending on 
the opposite side and blocking the streets and 
alleys, while endless masses of troops were bear- 
ing down on them from behind, and an un- 
reasoning hurry and alarm overcame them. 
They all rushed forward to the bridge, onto 
it, and to the fords and the boats. Kutiizov 
himself had driven round by side streets to the 
other side of Moscow. 

By ten o'clock in the morning of the second 
of September, only the rearguard remained in 
the Dorogomilov suburb, where they had am- 
ple room. The main army was on the other 
side of Moscow or beyond it. 

At that very time, at ten in the morning of 
the second of September, Napoleon was stand- 
ing among his troops on the Pokl6nny Hill 
looking at the panorama spread out before 
him. From the twenty-sixth of August to the 
second of September, that is from the battle of 
Borodinti to the entry of the French into Mos- 
cow, during the whole of that agitating, mem- 
orable week, there had been the extraordi- 
nary autumn weather that always comes as a 
surprise, when the sun hangs low and gives 
more heat than in spring, when everything 
shines so brightly in the rare clear atmosphere 
that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strength- 
ened and refreshed by inhaling the aromatic 



498 



WAR AND PEACE 



autumn air, when even the nights are warm, 
and when in those dark warm nights, golden 
stars startle and delight us continually by fall- 
ing from the sky. 

At ten in the morning of the second of Sep- 
tember this weather still held. 

The brightness of the morning was magical. 
Moscow seen from the Pokl6nny Hill lay spa- 
ciously spread out with her river, her gardens, 
and her churches, and she seemed to be living 
her usual life, her cupolas glittering like stars 
in the sunlight. 

The view of the strange city with its pecul- 
iar architecture, such as he had never seen be- 
fore, filled Napoleon with the rather envious 
and uneasy curiosity men feel when they see 
an alien form of life that has no knowledge of 
them. This city was evidently living with the 
full force of its own life. By the indefinite signs 
which, even at a distance, distinguish a living 
body from a dead one, Napoleon from the Po- 
k!6nny Hill perceived the throb of life in the 
town and felt, as it were, the breathing of that 
great and beautiful body. 

Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her 
to be a mother; every foreigner who sees her, 
even if ignorant of her significance as the 
mother city, must feel her feminine character, 
and Napoleon felt it. 

"Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables 4g- 
Uses, Moscou la saint e. La voil&amp; done en fin , 
cette fameuse ville! II etait temps" * said he, 
and dismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow 
to be spread out before him, and summoned 
Lelorgne d'Ideville, the interpreter. 

"A town captured by the enemy is like a 
maid who has lost her honor," thought he (he 
had said so to Tuchk6v at Smolensk). From 
that point of view he gazed at the Oriental 
beauty he had not seen before. It seemed 
strange to him that his long-felt wish, which 
had seemed unattainable, had at last been re- 
alized. In the clear morning light he gazed 
now at the city and now at the plan, consider- 
ing its details, and the assurance of possessing 
it agitated and awed him. 

"But could it be otherwise?" he thought. 
"Here is this capital at my feet. Where is Alex- 
ander now, and of what is he thinking? A 
strange, beautiful, and majestic city; and a 
strange and majestic moment! In what light 
must I appear to them!" thought he, thinking 
of his troops. "Here she is, the reward for all 

1 "That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches, 
holy Moscow! Here it is then at last, that famous 
city. It was high time." 



those fainthearted rnen, M he reflected, glanc- 
ing at those near him and at the troops who 
were approaching and forming up. "One word 
from me, one movement of my hand, and that 
ancient capital of the Tsars would perish. But 
my clemency is always ready to descend upon 
the vanquished. I must be magnanimous and 
truly great. But no, it can't be true that I am 
in Moscow," he suddenly thought. "Yet here 
she is lying at my feet, with her golden domes 
and crosses scintillating and twinkling in the 
sunshine. But I shall spare her. On the ancient 
monuments of barbarism and despotism I will 
inscribe great words of justice and mercy. . . . 
It is just this which Alexander will feel most 
painfully, I know him." (It seemed to Napo- 
leon that the chief import of what was taking 
place lay in the personal struggle between him- 
self and Alexander.) "From the height of the 
Kremlin yes, there is the Kremlin, yes I will 
give them just laws; I will teach them the 
meaning of true civilization, I will make gen- 
erations of boyars remember their conqueror 
with love. I will tell the deputation that I did 
not, and do not, desire war, that I have waged 
war only against the false policy of their court; 
that I love and respect Alexander and that in 
Moscow I will accept terms of peace worthy 
of myself and of my people. I do not wish to 
utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an 
honored monarch. 'Boyars,' I will say to them, 
'I do not desire war, I desire the peace and 
welfare of all my subjects.' However, I know 
their presence will inspire me, and I shall speak 
to them as I always do: clearly, impressively, 
and majestically. But can it be true that I am 
in Moscow? Yes, there she lies." 

"Qu r on m'amene les boyars" a said he to his 
suite. 

A general with a brilliant suite galloped off 
at once to fetch the boyars. 

Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched 
and was again standing in the same place on 
the Pokl6nny Hill awaiting the deputation. 
His speech to the boyars had already taken 
definite shape in his imagination. That speech 
was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon 
understood it. 

He was himself carried away by the tone of 
magnanimity he intended to adopt toward 
Moscow. In his imagination he appointed days 
for assemblies at the palace of the Tsars, at 
which Russian notables and his own would 
mingle. He mentally appointed a governor, 
one who would win the hearts of the people. 

1 "Bring the boyars to me." 



BOOK ELEVEN 

Having learned that there were many chari- 
table institutions in Moscow he mentally de- 
cided that he would shower favors on them all. 
He thought that, as in Africa he had to put on 
a burnoose and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow 
he must be beneficent like the Tsars. And in 
order finally to touch the hearts of the Rus- 
siansand being like all Frenchmen unable to 
imagine anything sentimental without a refer- 
ence to ma ch&amp;re, ma tendre, ma pauvre m&amp;re * 
he decided that he would place an inscrip- 
tion on all these establishments in large letters: 
"This establishment is dedicated to my dear 
mother." Or no, it should be simply: Maison 
de ma Mtrefhe concluded. "But am I really 
in Moscow? Yes, here it lies before me, but 
why is the deputation from the city so long in 
appearing?" he wondered. 

Meanwhile an agitated consultation was be- 
ing carried on in whispers among his generals 
and marshals at the rear of his suite. Those 
sent to fetch the deputation had returned with 
the news that Moscow was empty, that every- 
one had left it. The faces of those who were 
not conferring together were pale and per- 
turbed. They were not alarmed by the fact that 
Moscow had been abandoned by its inhabi- 
tants (grave as that fact seemed), but by the 
question how to tell the Emperor without 
putting him in the terrible position of appear- 
ing ridiculous that he had been awaiting the 
boyars so long in vain: that there were drunk- 
en mobs left in Moscow but no one else. Some 
said that a deputation of some sort must be 
scraped together, others disputed that opinion 
and maintained that the Emperor should first 
be carefully and skillfully prepared, and then 
told the truth. 

"He will have to be told, all the same," said 
some gentlemen of the suite. "But, gentlemen 



499 

drawn out was beginning to lose its sublimity, 
gave a sign with his hand. A single report of a 
signaling gun followed, and the troops, who 
were already spread out on different sides of 
Moscow, moved into the city through the Tver, 
Kaluga, and Dorogomflov gates. Faster and 
faster, vying with one another, they moved at 
the double or at a trot, vanishing amid the 
clouds of dust they raised and making the air 
ring with a deafening roar of mingling shouts. 
Drawn on by the movement of his troops 
Napoleon rode with them as far as the Doro- 
gomilov gate, but there again stopped and, dis- 
mounting from his horse, paced for a long 
time by the Kammer-Kolle'zski rampart, await- 
ing the deputation. 



The position was the more awkward because 
the Emperor, meditating upon his magnani- 
mous plans, was pacing patiently up and down 
before the outspread map, occasionally glanc- 
ing along the road to Moscow from under his 
lifted hand with a bright and proud smile. 

"But it's impossible . . ." declared the gentle- 
men of the suite, shrugging their shoulders but 
not venturing to utter the implied word le 
ridicule. . . . 

At last the Emperor, tired of futile expecta- 
tion, his actor's instinct suggesting to him that 
the sublime moment having been too long 

1 "My dear, my tender, my poor mother." 
1 "House of my Mother." 



CHAPTER XX 

MEANWHILE Moscow was empty. There were 
still people in it, perhaps a fiftieth part of its 
former inhabitants had remained, but it was 
empty. It was empty in the sense that a dying 
queenless hive is empty. 

In a queenless hive no life is left though to 
a superficial glance it seems as much alive as 
other hives. 

The bees circle round a queenless hive in the 
hot beams of the midday sun as gaily as around 
the living hives; from a distance it smells of 
honey like the others, and bees fly in and out 
in the same way. But one has only to observe 
that hive to realize that there is no longer 
any life in it. The bees do not fly in the same 
way, the smell and the sound that meet the 
beekeeper are not the same. To the beekeep- 
er's tap on the wall of the sick hive, instead 
of the former instant unanimous humming 
of tens of thousands of bees with their ab- 
domens threateningly compressed, and pro- 
ducing by the rapid vibration of their wings 
an aerial living sound, the only reply is a dis- 
connected buzzing from different parts of the 
deserted hive. From the alighting board, in- 
stead of the former spirituous fragrant smell of 
honey and venom, and the warm whiffs of 
crowded life, comes an odor of emptiness and 
decay mingling with the smell of honey. There 
are no longer sentinels sounding the alarm 
with their abdomens raised, and ready to die 
in defense of the hive. There is no longer the 
measured quiet sound of throbbing activity, 
like the sound of boiling water, but diverse 
discordant sounds of disorder. In and out of 
the hive long black robber bees smeared with 
honey fly timidly and shiftily. They do not 
sting, but crawl away from danger. Formerly 



5 oo 



WAR AND PEACE 



only bees laden with honey flew into the hive, 
and they flew out empty; now they fly out 
laden. The beekeeper opens the lower part of 
the hive and peers in. Instead of black, glossy 
beestamed by toil, clinging to one another's 
legs and drawing out the wax, with a ceaseless 
hum of labor that used to hang in long clus- 
ters down to the floor of the hive, drowsy 
shriveled bees crawl about separately in vari- 
ous directions on the floor and walls of the 
hive. Instead of a neatly glued floor, swept by 
the bees with the fanning of their wings, there 
is a floor littered with bits of wax, excrement, 
dying bees scarcely moving their legs, and dead 
ones that have not been cleared away. 

The beekeeper opens the upper part of the 
hive and examines the super. Instead of serried 
rows of bees sealing up every gap in the combs 
and keeping the brood warm, he sees the skill- 
ful complex structures of the combs, but no 
longer in their former state of purity. All is 
neglected and foul. Black robber bees are 
swiftly and stealthily prowling about the 
combs, and the short home bees, shriveled and 
listless as if they were old, creep slowly about 
without trying to hinder the robbers, having 
lost all motive and all sense of life. Drones, 
bumblebees, wasps, and butterflies knock awk- 
wardly against the walls of the hive in their 
flight. Here and there among the cells con- 
taining dead brood and honey an angry buzz- 
ing can sometimes be heard. Here and there a 
couple of bees, by force of habit and custom 
cleaning out the brood cells, with efforts be- 
yond their strength laboriously drag away a 
dead bee or bumblebee without knowing why 
they do it. In another corner two old bees are 
languidly fighting, or cleaning themselves, or 
feeding one another, without themselves know- 
ing whether they do it with friendly or hostile 
intent. In a third place a crowd of bees, crush- 
ing one another, attack some victim and fight 
and smother it, and the victim, enfeebled or 
killed, drops from above slowly and lightly as 
a feather, among the heap of corpses. The 
keeper opens the two center partitions to ex- 
amine the brood cells. In place of the former 
close dark circles formed by thousands of bees 
sitting back to back and guarding the high 
mystery of generation, he sees hundreds of 
dull, listless, and sleepy shells of bees. They 
have almost all died unawares, sitting in the 
sanctuary they had guarded and which is now 
no more. They reek of decay and death. Only 
a few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to 
settle on the enemy's hand, lacking the spirit 



to die stinging him; the rest are dead and fall 
as lightly as fish scales. The beekeeper closes 
the hive, chalks a mark on it, and when he 
has time tears out its contents and burns it 
clean. 

So in the same way Moscow was empty when 
Napoleon, weary, uneasy, and morose, paced 
up and down in front of the Kdmmer-Kollez- 
ski rampart, awaiting what to his mind was a 
necessary, if but formal, observance of the 
proprieties a deputation. 

In various corners of Moscow there still re- 
mained a few people aimlessly moving about, 
following their old habits and hardly aware of 
what they were doing. 

When with due circumspection Napoleon 
was informed that Moscow was empty, he 
looked angrily at his informant, turned away, 
and silently continued to walk to and fro. 

"My carriage!" he said. 

He took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on 
duty and drove into the suburb. "Moscow de- 
serted!" he said to himself. "What an incredi- 
ble event!" 

He did not drive into the town, but put up 
at an inn in the Dorogomilov suburb. 

The coup de theatre had not come off. 

CHAPTER XXI 

THE RUSSIAN TROOPS were passing through 
Moscow from two o'clock at night till two in 
the afternoon and bore away with them the 
wounded and the last of the inhabitants who 
were leaving. 

The greatest crush during the movement of 
the troops took place at the Stone, Moskva, 
and,Yatiza bridges. 

While the troops, dividing into two parts 
when passing around the Kremlin, were throng- 
ing the Moskvil and the Stone bridges, a great 
many soldiers, taking advantage of the stop- 
page and congestion, turned back from the 
bridges and slipped stealthily and silently past 
the church of Vasili the Beatified and under 
the Borovitski gate, back up the hill to the 
Red Square where some instinct told them 
they could easily take things not belonging to 
them. Crowds of the kind seen at cheap sales 
filled all the passages and alleys of the Bazaar. 
But there were no dealers with voices of ingra- 
tiating affability inviting customers to enter; 
there were no hawkers, nor the usual motley 
crowd of female purchasers but only soldiers, 
in uniforms and overcoats though without 
muskets, entering the Bazaar empty-handed 
and silently making their way out through 



BOOK ELEVEN 



501 



its passages with bundles. Tradesmen and 
their assistants (of whom there were but 
few) moved about among the soldiers quite 
bewildered. They unlocked their shops and 
locked them up again, and themselves carried 
goods away with the help of their assistants. On 
the square in front of the Bazaar were drum- 
mers beating the muster call. But the roll of 
the drums did not make the looting soldiers 
run in the direction of the drum as formerly, 
but made them, on the contrary, run farther 
away. Among the soldiers in the shops and 
passages some men were to be seen in gray 
coats, with closely shaven heads. 1 Two officers, 
one with a scarf over his uniform and mounted 
on a lean, dark-gra'y horse, the other in an 
overcoat and on foot, stood at the corner of 
the Ilyfnka Street, talking. A third officer gal- 
loped up to them. 

"The general orders them all to be driven 
out at once, without fail. This is outrageous! 
Half the men have dispersed." 

"Where are you off to? ... Where? . . ." he 
shouted to three infantrymen without muskets 
who, holding up the skirts of their overcoats, 
were slipping past him into the Bazaar pas- 
sage. "Stop, you rascals!" 

"But how are you going to stop them?" re- 
plied another officer. "There is no getting 
them together. The array should push on be- 
fore the rest bolt, that's all!" &gt;T 

"How can one push on? They are stuck 
there, wedged on the bridge, and don't move. 
Shouldn't we put a cordon round to prevent 
the rest from running away?" 

"Come, go in there and drive them out!" 
shouted the senior officer. 

The officer in the scarf dismounted, called 
up a drummer, and went with him into the 
arcade. Some soldiers started running away in 
a group. A shopkeeper with red pimples on his 
cheeks near the nose, and a calm, persistent, 
calculating expression on his plump face, hur- 
riedly and ostentatiously approached the of- 
ficer, swinging his arms. 

"Your honor!" said he. "Be so good as to 
protect us! We won't grudge trifles, you are 
welcome to anything we shall be delighted! 
Pray! . . . I'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for 
such an honorable gentleman, or even two 
pieces with pleasure. For we feel how it is; but 
what's all this sheer robbery! If you please, 
could not guards be placed if only to let us 
close the shop. . . ." 

1 Prisoners who had been released from jail. 
TR. 



Several shopkeepers crowded round the of- 
ficer. 

"Eh, what twaddle!" said one of them, a 
thin, stern-looking man. "When one's head is 
gone one doesn't weep for one's hair! Take 
what any of you like!" And flourishing his 
arm energetically he turned sideways to the 
officer. 

"It's all very well for you, Ivdn Sidorych, to 
talk," said the first tradesman angrily. "Please 
step inside, your honor!" 

"Talk indeed!" cried the thin one. "In my 
three shops here I have a hundred thousand 
rubles' worth of goods. Can they be saved when 
the army has gone? Eh, what people! 'Against 
God's might our hands can't fight.' " 

"Come inside, your honor!" repeated the 
first tradesman, bowing. 

The officer stood perplexed and his face 
showed indecision. 

"It's not my business!" he exclaimed, and 
strode on quickly down one of the passages. 

From one open shop came the sound of 
blows and vituperation, and just as the officer 
came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shav- 
en head was flung out violently. 

This man, bent double, rushed past the 
tradesman and the officer. The officer pounced 
on the soldiers who were in the shops, but at 
that moment fearful screams reached them 
from the huge crowd on the Moskvi bridge 
and the officer ran out into the square. 

"What is it? What is it?" he asked, but his 
comrade was already galloping off past Vasili 
the Beatified in the direction from which the 
screams carne. 

The officer mounted his horse and rode aft- 
er him. When he reached the bridge he saw 
two unlhnbered guns, the infantry crossing 
the bridge, several overturned carts, and fright- 
ened and laughing faces among the troops. Be- 
side the cannon a cart was standing to which 
two horses were harnessed. Four borzois with 
collars were pressing close to the wheels. The 
cart was loaded high, and at the very top, be- 
side a child's chair with its legs in the air, sat 
a peasant woman uttering piercing and des- 
perate shrieks. He was told by his fellow officers 
that the screams of the crowd and the shrieks of 
the woman were due to the fact that General 
Erm61ov, coming up to the crowd and learning 
that soldiers were dispersing among the shops 
while crowds of civilians blocked the bridge, 
had ordered two guns to be unlimbered and 
made a show of firing at the bridge. The crowd, 
crushing one another, upsetting carts, and 



502 

shouting and squeezing desperately, had 
cleared off the bridge and the troops were now 
moving forward. 

CHAPTER XXII 

MEANWHILE, the city itself was deserted. There 
was hardly anyone in the streets. The gates 
and shops were all closed, only here and there 
round the taverns solitary shouts or drunken 
songs could be heard. Nobody drove through 
the streets and footsteps were rarely heard. 
The Povarskdya was quite still and deserted. 
The huge courtyard of the RosttWs' house was 
littered with wisps of hay and with dung from 
the horses, and not a soul was to be seen there. 
In the great drawing room of the house, which 
had been left with all it contained, were two 
people. They were the yard porter Ignat, and 
the pageboy Mishka, Vasilich's grandson who 
had stayed in Moscow with his grandfather. 
Mishka had opened the clavichord and was 
strumming on it with one finger. The yard 
porter, his arms akimbo, stood smiling with 
satisfaction before the large mirror. 

"Isn't it fine, eh, Uncle Ignat?" said the boy, 
suddenly beginning to strike the keyboard with 
both hands. 

"Only fancy!" answered Ignat, surprised at 
the broadening grin on his face in the mirror. 

"Impudence! Impudence!" they heard be- 
hind them the voice of Mavra Kuzmfnichna 
who had entered silently. "How he's grinning, 
the fat mug! Is that what you're here for? 
Nothing's cleared away down there and Vasi- 
lich is worn out. Just you wait a bit!" 

Ignat left off smiling, adjusted his belt, and 
went out of the room with meekly downcast 
eyes. 

"Aunt, I did it gently," said the boy. 

"I'll give you something gently, you monkey 
you!" cried Mdvra Kuzminichna, raising her 
arm threateningly. "Go and get the samovar to 
boil for your grandfather." 

Mdvra Kuzmfnichna flicked the dust off the 
clavichord and closed it, and with a deep sigh 
left the drawing room and locked its main 
door. 

Going out into the yard she paused to con- 
sider where she should go next to drink tea 
in the servants' wing with Vasflich, or into the 
storeroom to put away what still lay about. 

She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the 
quiet street. Someone stopped at the gate, and 
the latch rattled as someone tried to open it. 

Mavra Kuzminichna went to the gate. 

"Who do you want?" 



WAR AND PEACE 

"The count Count Ilya Andrevich Ros- 
t6v." 

"And who are you?" 

"An officer, I have to see him," came the 
reply in a pleasant, well-bred Russian voice. 

Mavra Kuzmfnichna opened the gate and 
an officer of eighteen, with the round face of a 
Rost6v, entered the yard. 

"They have gone away, sir. Went away yes- 
terday at vespertime," said Mdvra Kuzminich- 
na cordially. 

The young officer standing in the gateway, 
as if hesitating whether to enter or not, clicked 
his tongue. 

"Ah, how annoying!" he muttered. "I should 
have come yesterday Ah, what a pity." 

Meanwhile, Mdvra Kuzminichna was atten- 
tively and sympathetically examining the fa- 
miliar Rost6v features of tlie young man's face, 
his tattered coat and trodden-down boots. 

"What did you want to see the count for?" 
she asked. 

"Oh well ... it can't be helped!" said he in 
a tone of vexation and placed his hand on the 
gate as if to leave. 

He again paused in indecision. 

"You see," he suddenly said, "I am a kins- 
man of the count's and he has been very kind 
to me. As you see" (he glanced with an amused 
air and good-natured smile at his coat and 
boots) "my things are worn out and I have no 
money, so I was going to ask the count . . ." 

Mdvra Kuzmfnichna did not let him finish. 

"Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment," 
said she. 

And as soon as the officer let go of the gate 
handle she turned and, hurrying away on her 
old legs, went through the back yard to the 
servants' quarters. 

While Mdvra Kuzmfnichna was running to 
her room the officer walked about the yard gaz- 
ing at his worn-out boots with lowered head 
and a faint smile on his lips. "What a pity I've 
missed Uncle! What a nice old woman! Where 
has she run off to? And how am I to find the 
nearest way to overtake my regiment, which 
must by now be getting near the Rog6zhski 
gate?" thought he. Just then Mdvra Kuzmi- 
nichna appeared from behind the corner of 
the house with a frightened yet resolute look, 
carrying a rolled-up check kerchief in her 
hand. While still a few steps from the officer 
she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a 
white twenty- five-ruble assignat and hastily 
handed it to him. 

"If his excellency had been at home, as a 



BOOK ELEVEN 

kinsman he would of course . . . but as it is . . ." 

Mdvra Kuzminichna grew abashed and con- 
fused. The officer did not decline, but took the 
note quietly and thanked her. 

"If the count had been at home . . ." Ma" vra 
Kuzmfnichna went on apologetically. "Christ 
be with you, sir! May God preserve you!" said 
she, bowing as she saw him out. 

Swaying his head and smiling as if amused 
at himself, the officer ran almost at a trot 
through the deserted streets toward the Yauza 
bridge to overtake his regiment. 

But Ma* vra Kuzminichna stood at the closed 
gate for some time with moist eyes, pensively 
swaying her head and feeling an unexpected 
flow of motherly tenderness and pity for the 
unknown young officer. 



53 



CHAPTER XXIII 

FROM AN UNFINISHED HOUSE on the Varvdrka, 
the ground floor of which was a dramshop, 
came drunken shouts and songs. On benches 
round the tables in a dirty little room sat some 
ten factory hands. Tipsy and perspiring, with 
dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they were all 
laboriously singing some song or other. They 
were singing discordantly, arduously, and with 
great effort, evidently not because they wished 
to sing, but because they wanted to show they 
were drunk and on a spree. One, a tall, fair- 
haired lad in a clean blue coat, was standing 
over the others. His face with its fine straight 
nose would have been handsome had it not 
been for his thin, compressed, twitching lips 
and dull, gloomy, fixed eyes. Evidently pos- 
sessed by some idea, he stood over those who 
were singing, and solemnly and jerkily flour- 
ished above their heads his white arm with the 
sleeve turned up to the elbow, trying unnatu- 
rally to spread out his dirty fingers. The sleeve 
of his coat kept slipping down and he always 
carefully rolled it up again with his left hand, 
as if it were most important that the sinewy- 
white arm he was flourishing should be bare. 
In the midst of the song cries were heard, and 
fighting and blows in the passage and porch. 
The tall lad waved his arm. 

"Stop it!" he exclaimed peremptorily. 
"There's a fight, lads!" And, still rolling up his 
sleeve, he went out to the porch. 

The factory hands followed him. These 
men, who under the leadership of the tall lad 
were drinking in the dramshop that morning, 
had brought the publican some skins from the 
factory and for this had had drink served them. 
The blacksmiths from a neighboring smithy, 



hearing the sounds of revelry in the tavern . 
and supposing it to have been broken into, 
wished to force their way in too and a fight in 
the porch had resulted. 

The publican was fighting one of the smiths 
at the door, and when the workmen came out 
the smith, wrenching himself free from the 
tavernkecper, fell face downward on the pave- 
ment. 

Another smith tried to enter the doorway, 
pressing against the publican with his chest. 

The lad with the turned-up sleeve gave the 
smith a blow in the face and cried wildly: 
"They're fighting us, lads!" 

At that moment the first smith got up and, 
scratching his bruised face to make it bleed, 
shouted in a tearful voice: "Police! Murder! 
. . . They've killed a man, lads!" 

"Oh, gracious me, a man beaten to death- 
killed! . . ." screamed a woman coming out of 
a gate close by. 

A crowd gathered round the bloodstained 
smith. 

"Haven't you robbed people enough tak- 
ing their last shirts?" said a voice addressing 
the publican. "What have you killed a man 
for, you thief?" 

The tall lad, standing in the porch, turned 
his bleared eyes from the publican to the smith 
and back again as if considering whom he 
ought to fight now. 

"Murderer!" he shouted suddenly to the 
publican. "Bind him, lads!" 

"I daresay you would like to bind me!" 
shouted the publican, pushing away the men 
advancing on him, and snatching his cap from 
his head he flung it on the ground. 

As if this action had some mysterious and 
menacing significance, the workmen surround- 
ing the publican paused in indecision. 

"I know the law very well, mates! I'll take 
the matter to the captain of police. You think 
I won't get to him? Robbery is not permitted 
to anybody nowadays!" shouted the publican, 
picking up his cap. 

"Come along then! Come along then!" the 
publican and the tall young fellow repeated 
one after the other, and they moved up the 
street together. 

The bloodstained smith went beside them. 
The factory hands and others followed be- 
hind, talking and shouting. 

At the corner of the Moroseyka, opposite a 
large house with closed shutters and bearing a 
bootmaker's signboard, stood a score of thin, 
worn-out, gloomy-faced bootmakers, wearing 



WAR AND PEACE 



overalls and long tattered coats. 

"He should pay folks off properly/' a thin 
workingman, with frowning brows and a 
straggly beard, was saying. 

"But he's sucked our blood and now he thinks 
he's quit of us. He's been misleading us all 
the week and now that he's brought us to this 
pass he's made off." 

On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained 
man the workman ceased speaking, and with 
eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined the 
moving crowd. 

"Where are all the folks going?" 

"Why, to the police, of course!" 

"I say, is it true that we have been beaten?" 
"And what did you think? Look what folks 
are saying." 

Questions and answers were heard. The pub- 
lican, taking advantage of the increased crowd, 
dropped behind and returned to his tavern. 

The tall youth, not noticing the disappear- 
ance of his foe, waved his bare arm and went 
on talking incessantly, attracting general at- 
tention to himself. It was around him that the 
people chiefly crowded, expecting answers 
from him to the questions that occupied all 
their minds. 

"He must keep order, keep the law, that's 
what the government is there for. Am I not 
right, good Christians?" said the tall youth, 
with a scarcely perceptible smile. "He thinks 
there's no government! How can one do with- 
out government? Or else there would be plenty 
who'd rob us." 

"Why talk nonsense?" rejoined voices in the 
crowd. "Will they give up Moscow like this? 
They told you that for fun, and you believed 
it! Aren't there plenty of troops on the march? 
Let him in, indeed! That's what the govern- 
ment is for. You'd better listen to what people 
are saying," said some of the mob pointing to 
the tall youth. 

By the wall of China-Town a smaller group 
of people were gathered round a man in a 
frieze coat who held a paper in his hand. 

"An ukase, they are reading an ukdsel Read- 
ing an ukise!" cried voices in the crowd, and 
the people rushed toward the reader. 

The man in the frieze coat was reading the 
broadsheet of August 31. When the crowd col- 
lected round him he seemed confused, but at 
the demand of the tall lad who had pushed his 
way up to him, he began in a rather tremulous 
voice to read the sheet from the beginning. 

"Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene 
Highness/' he read ("Sirin Highness" said the 



tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips 
and a frown on his brow), "to consult with him, 
to act, and to aid the army to exterminate 
these scoundrels. We too will take part . . ." 
the reader went on, and then paused ("Do 
you see," shouted the youth victoriously, "he's 

going to clear up the whole affair for you "), 

"in destroying them, and will send these visi- 
tors to the devil. I will come back to dinner, 
and we'll set to work. We will do, completely 
do, and undo these scoundrels." 

The last words were read out in the midst 
of complete silence. The tall lad hung his head 
gloomily. It was evident that no one had un- 
derstood the last part. In particular, the words 
"I will come back to dinner," evidently dis- 
pleased both reader and audience. The peo- 
ple's minds were tuned to a high pitch and 
this was too simple and needlessly comprehen- 
sibleit was what any one of them might have 
said and therefore was what an ukase emanat- 
ing from the highevSt authority should not say. 

They all stood despondent and silent. The 
tall youth moved his lips and swayed from side 
to side. 

"We should ask him . . . that's he himself!" 
. . . "Yes, ask him indeed!" . . . "Why not? He'll 
explain" . . . voices in the rear of the crowd 
were suddenly heard saying, and the general 
attention turned to the police superintendent's 
trap which drove into the square attended by 
two mounted dragoons. 

The superintendent of police, who hadgone 
that morning by Count Rostopchin's orders to 
burn the barges and had in connection with 
that matter acquired a large sum of money 
which was at that moment in his pocket, on 
seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told 
his coachman to stop. 

"What people are these?" he shouted to the 
men, who were moving singly and timidly in 
the direction of his trap. 

"What people are these?" he shouted again, 
receiving no answer. 

"Your honor . . ." replied the shopman in 
the frieze coat, "your honor, in accord with 
the proclamation of his highest excellency the 
count, they desire to serve, not sparing their 
lives, and it is not any kind of riot, but as his 
highest excellence said . . ." 

"The count has not left, he is here, and an 
order will be issued concerning you," said the 
superintendent of police. "Go on!" he ordered 
his coachman. 

The crowd halted, pressing around those 
who had heard what the superintendent had 



BOOK ELEVEN 



55 



said, and looking at the departing trap. 

The superintendent of police turned round 
at that moment with a scared look, said some- 
thing to his coachman, and his horses increased 
their speed. 

"It's a fraud, lads! Lead the way to him, 
himself!" shouted the tall youth. "Don't let 
him go, lads! Let him answer us! Keep him!" 
shouted different voices, and the people dashed 
in pursuit of the trap. 

Following the superintendent of police and 
talking loudly the crowd went in the direction 
of the Lubyanka Street. 

"There now, the gentry and merchants have 
gone away and left us to perish. Do they think 
we're dogs?" voices in the crowd were heard 
saying more and more frequently. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

ON THE EVENING of the first of September, after 
his interview with Kutuzov, Count Rostopchin 
had returned to Moscow mortified and of- 
fended because he had not been invited to at- 
tend the council of war, and because Kutuzov 
had paid no attention to his offer to take part 
in the defense of the city; amazed also at the 
novel outlook revealed to him at the camp, 
which treated the tranquillity of the capital 
and its patriotic fervor as not merely secondary 
but quite irrelevant and unimportant matters. 
Distressed, offended, and surprised by all this, 
Rostopchfn had returned to Moscow. After 
supper he lay down on a sofa without undress- 
ing, and was awakened soon after midnight 
by a courier bringing him a letter from Kutu- 
zov. This letter requested the count to send 
police officers to guide the troops through the 
town, as the army was retreating to the Ryazan 
road beyond Moscow. This was not news to 
Rostopchin. He had known that Moscow 
would be abandoned not merely since his in- 
terview the previous day with Kutuzov on the 
Pokl6nny Hill but ever since the battle of 
Borodin6, for all the generals who came to 
Moscow after that battle had said unanimously 
that it was impossible to fight another battle, 
and since then the government property had 
been removed every night, and half the inhabi- 
tants had left the city with Rostopchfn's own 
permission. Yet all the same this information 
astonished and irritated the count, coming as 
it did in the form of a simple note with an or- 
der from Kutuzov, and received at night, break- 
ing in on his beauty sleep. 

When later on in his memoirs Count Ros- 
topchin explained his actions at this time, he 



repeatedly says that he was then actuated by 
two important considerations: to maintain 
tranquillity in Moscow and expedite the de- 
parture of the inhabitants. If one accepts this 
twofold aim all Rostopchfn's actions appear ir- 
reproachable. "Why were the holy relics, the 
arms, ammunition, gunpowder, and stores of 
corn not removed? Why were thousands of in- 
habitants deceived into believing that Moscow 
would not be given up and thereby ruined?" 
"To preserve the tranquillity of the city," ex- 
plains Count Rostopchin. "Why were bundles 
of useless papers from the government offices, 
and Leppich's balloon and other articles re- 
moved?" "To leave the town empty," explains 
Count Rostopchin. One need only admit that 
public tranquillity is in danger and any action 
finds a justification. 

All the horrors of the reign of terror were 
based only on solicitude for public tranquil- 
lity. 

On what, then, was Count Rostopchfn's fear 
for the tranquillity of Moscow based in 1812? 
What reason was there for assuming any prob- 
ability of an uprising in the city? The inhabi- 
tants were leaving it and the retreating troops 
were filling it. Why should that cause the 
masses to riot? 

Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia 
did anything resembling an insurrection ever 
occur when the enemy entered a town. More 
than ten thousand people were still in Moscow 
on the first and second of September, and except 
for a mob in the governor's courtyard, assem- 
bled there at his bidding, nothing happened. 
It is obvious that there would have been even 
less reason to expect a disturbance among the 
people if after the battle of Borodin6, when 
the surrender of Moscow became certain or at 
least probable, Rostopchin instead of exciting 
the people by distributing arms and broad- 
sheets had taken steps to remove all the holy 
relics, the gunpowder, munitions, and money, 
and had told the population plainly that the 
town would be abandoned. 

Rostopchin, though he had patriotic senti- 
ments, was a sanguine and impulsive man who 
had always moved in the highest administra- 
tive circles and had no understanding at all of 
the people he supposed himself to be guiding. 
Ever since the enemy's entry into Smolensk he 
had in imagination been playing the role of 
director of the popular feeling of "the heart of 
Russia." Not only did it seem to him (as to all 
administrators) that he controlled the external 
actions of Moscow's inhabitants, but he also 



WAR AND PEACE 



thought he controlled their mental attitude by 
means of his broadsheets and posters, written 
in a coarse tone which the people despise in 
their own class and do not understand from 
those in authority. Rostopchfn was so pleased 
with the fine role of leader of popular feeling, 
and had grown so used to it, that the necessity 
of relinquishing that role and abandoning 
Moscow without any heroic display took him 
unawares and he suddenly felt the ground slip 
away from under his feet, so that he positively 
did not-know what to do. Though he knew it 
was coming, he did not till the last moment 
wholeheartedly believe that Moscow would be 
abandoned, and did not prepare for it. The in- 
habitants left against his wishes. If the govern- 
ment offices were removed, this was only done 
on the demand of officials to whom the count 
yielded reluctantly. He was absorbed in the 
role he had created for himself. As is often the 
case with those gifted with an ardent imagina- 
tion, though he had long known that Moscow 
would be abandoned he knew it only with his 
intellect, he did not believe it in his heart and 
did not adapt himself mentally to this new 
position of affairs. 

All his painstaking and energetic activity 
(in how far it was useful and had any effect on 
the people is another question) had been sim- 
ply directed toward arousing in the masses his 
own feeling of patriotic hatred of the French. 

But when events assumed their true histori- 
cal character, when expressing hatred for the 
French in words proved insufficient, when it 
was not even possible to express that hatred by 
fighting a battle, when self-confidence was of 
no avail in relation to the one question before 
Moscow, when the whole population streamed 
out of Moscow as one man, abandoning their 
belongings and proving by that negative ac- 
tion all the depth of their national feeling, 
then the role chosen by Rostopchin suddenly 
appeared senseless. He unexpectedly felt him- 
self ridiculous, weak, and alone, with no ground 
to stand on. 

When, awakened from his sleep, he received 
that cold, peremptory note from Kutiizov, he 
felt the more irritated the more he felt himself 
to blame. All that he had been specially put in 
charge of, the state property which he should 
have removed, was still in Moscow and it was 
no longer possible to take the whole of it away. 

"Who is to blame for it? Who has let things 
come to such a pass?" he ruminated. "Not I, 
of course. I had everything ready. I had Mos- 
cow firmly in hand. And this is what they have 



let it come to! Villains! Traitors!" he thought, 
without clearly defining who the villains and 
traitors were, but feeling it necessary to hate 
those traitors whoever they might be who were 
to blame for the false and ridiculous position 
in which he found himself. 

All that night Count Rostopchfn issued or- 
ders, for which people came to him from all 
parts of Moscow. Those about him had never 
seen the count so morose and irritable. 

"Your excellency, the Director of the Regis- 
trar's Department has sent for instructions .... 
From the Consistory, from the Senate, from 
the University, from the Foundling Hospital, 
the Suffragan has sent . . . asking for informa- 
tion. . . . What are your orders about the Fire 
Brigade? From the governor of the prison . . . 
from the superintendent of the lunatic asy- 
lum . . ." All night long such announcements 
were continually being received by the count. 

To all these inquiries he gave brief and an- 
gry replies indicating that orders from him 
were not now needed, that the whole affair, 
carefully prepared by him, had now been 
ruined by somebody, and that that somebody 
would have to bear the whole responsibility 
for all that might happen. 

"Oh, tell that blockhead," he said in reply 
to the question from the Registrar's Depart- 
ment, "that he should remain to guard his 
documents. Now why are you asking silly ques- 
tions about the Fire Brigade? They have horses, 
let them be off to Vladimir, and not leave them 
to the French." 

"Your excellency, the superintendent of the 
lunatic asylum has come: what are your com- 
mands?" 

"My commands? Let them go away, that's all. 
. . . And let the lunatics out into the town. 
When lunatics command our armies God evi- 
dently means these other madmen to be free." 

In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in 
the prison, Count Rostopchfn shouted angrily 
at the governor: 

"Do you expect me to give you two battal- 
ionswhich we have not got for a convoy? Re- 
lease them, that's all about it!" 

"Your excellency, there are some political 
prisoners, Meshk6v, Vereshchagin . . ." 

"Vereshchdgin! Hasn't he been hanged yet?" 
shouted Rostopchfn. "Bring him to me!" 

CHAPTER XXV 

TOWARD NINE O'CLOCK in the morning, when 
the troops were already moving through Mos- 
cow, nobody came to the count any more for 



BOOK ELEVEN 

instructions. Those who were able to get away 
were going of their own accord, those who re- 
mained behind decided for themselves what 
they must do. 

The count ordered his carriage that he might 
drive to Sok61niki, and sat in his study with 
folded hands, morose, sallow, and taciturn. 

In quiet and untroubled times it seems to 
every administrator that it is only by his ef- 
forts that the whole population under his rule 
is kept going, and in this consciousness of be- 
ing indispensable every administrator finds the 
chief reward of his labor and efforts. While the 
sea of history remains calm the ruler-adminis- 
trator in his frail bark, holding on with a boat 
hook to the ship of the people and himself 
moving, naturally imagines that his efforts 
move the ship he is holding on to. But as soon 
as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave 
and the ship to move, such a delusion is no 
longer possible. The ship moves independent- 
ly with its own enormous motion, the boat 
hook no longer reaches the moving vessel, and 
suddenly the administrator, instead of appear- 
ing a ruler and a source of power, becomes an 
insignificant, useless, feeble man. 

Rostopchfn felt this, and it was this which 
exasperated him. 

The superintendent of police, whom the 
crowd had stopped, went in to see him at the 
same time as an adjutant who informed the 
count that the horses were harnessed. They 
were both pale, and the superintendent of 
police, after reporting that he had executed 
the instructions he had received, informed the 
count that an immense crowd had collected 
in the courtyard and wished to see him. 

Without saying a word Rostopchf n rose and 
walked hastily to his light, luxurious drawing 
room, went to the balcony door, took hold of 
the handle, let it go again, and went to the 
window from which he had a better view of 
the whole crowd. The tall lad was standing in 
front, flourishing his arm and saying some- 
thing with a stern look. The bloodstained smith 
stood beside him with a gloomy face. A drone 
of voices was audible through the closed win- 
dow. 

"Is my carriage ready?" asked Rostopchfn, 
stepping back from the window. 

"It is, your excellency," replied the adjutant. 

Rostopchfn went again to the balcony door. 

"But what do they want?" he asked the su- 
perintendent of police. 

"Your excellency, they say they have got 
ready, according to your orders, to go against 



507 

the French, and they shouted something about 
treachery. But it is a turbulent crowd, your 
excellency I hardly managed to get away from 
it. Your excellency, I venture to suggest . . ." 

"You may go. I don't need you to tell me 
what to do!" exclaimed Rostopchin angrily. 

He stood by the balcony door looking at the 
crowd. 

"This is what they have done with Russia! 
This is what they have done with me!" thought 
he, full of an irrepressible fury that welled up 
within him against the someone to whom what 
was happening might be attributed. As often 
happens with passionate people, he was mas- 
tered by anger but was still seeking an object 
on which to vent it. "Here is that mob, the 
dregs of the people," he thought as he gazed 
at the crowd: "this rabble they have roused by 
their folly! They want a victim," he thought 
as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm. 
And this thought occurred to him just because 
he himself desired a victim, something on 
which to vent his rage. 

"Is the carriage ready?" he asked again. 

"Yes, your excellency. What are your orders 
about Vereshchagin? He is waiting at the 
porch," said the adjutant. 

"Ah!" exclaimed Rostopchfn, as if struck by 
an unexpected recollection. 

And rapidly opening the door he went reso- 
lutely out onto the balcony. The talking in- 
stantly ceased, hats and caps were doffed, and 
all eyes were raised to the count. 

"Good morning, lads!" said the count brisk- 
ly and loudly. "Thank you for coming. I'll 
come out to you in a moment, but we must first 
settle with the villain. We must punish the 
villain who has caused the ruin of Moscow. 
Wait for me!" 

And the count stepped as briskly back into 
the room and slammed the door behind him. 

A murmur of approbation and satisfaction 
ran through the crowd. "He'll settle with all 
the villains, you'll seel And you said the French 
. . . He'll show you what law is!" the mob were 
saying as if reproving one another for their 
lack of confidence. 

A few minutes later an officer came hurried- 
ly out of the front door, gave an order, and 
the dragoons formed up in line. The crowd 
moved eagerly from the balcony toward the 
porch. Rostopchfn, coming out there with 
quick angry steps, looked hastily around as if 
seeking someone. 

"Where is he?" he inquired. And as he spoke 
he saw a young man coming round the corner 



508 



WAR AND PEACE 



of the house between two dragoons. He had a 
long thin neck, and his head, that had been 
half shaved, was again covered by short hair. 
This young man was dressed in a threadbare 
blue cloth coat lined with fox fur, that had 
once been smart, and dirty hempen convict 
trousers, over which were pulled his thin, dirty, 
trodden-down boots. On his thin, weak legs 
were heavy chains which hampered his irreso- 
lute movements. 

"Ah!" said Rostopchin, hurriedly turning 
away his eyes from the young man in the fur- 
lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of 
the porch. "Put him there." 

The young man in his clattering chains 
stepped clumsily to the spot indicated, hold- 
ing away with one finger the coat collar which 
chafed his neck, turned his long neck twice 
this way and that, sighed, and submissively 
folded before him his thin hands, unused to 
work. 

For several seconds while the young man 
was taking his place on the step the silence 
continued. Only among the back rows of the 
people, who were all pressing toward the one 
spot, could sighs, groans, and the shuffling of 
feet be heard. 

While waiting for the young man to take his 
place on the step Rostopchin stood frowning 
and rubbing his face with his hand. 

"Lads!" said he, with a metallic ring in his 
voice. "This man, Vereshchdgin, is the scoun- 
drel by whose doing Moscow is perishing." 

The young man in the fur-lined coat, stoop- 
ing a little, stood in a submissive attitude, his 
fingers clasped before him. His emaciated 
young face, disfigured by the half-shaven head, 
hung down hopelessly. At the count's first 
words he raised it slowly and looked up at him 
as if wishing to say something or at least to 
meet his eye. But Rostopchin did not look at 
him. A vein in the young man's long thin neck 
swelled like a cord and went blue behind the 
ear, and suddenly his face flushed. 

All eyes were fixed on him. He looked at 
the crowd, and rendered more hopeful by the 
expression he read on the faces there, he smiled 
sadly and timidly, and lowering his head shift- 
ed his feet on the step. 

"He has betrayed his Tsar and his country, 
he had gone over to Bonaparte. He alone of 
all the Russians has disgraced the Russian 
name, he has caused Moscow to perish," said 
Rostopchin in a sharp, even voice, but sudden- 
ly he glanced down at Vereshchagin who con- 
tinued to stand in the same submissive atti- 



tude. As if inflamed by the sight, he raised his 
arm and addressed the people, almost shout- 
ing: 

"Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him 
over to you." 

The crowd remained silent and only pressed 
closer and closer to one another. To keep one 
another back, to breathe in that stifling atmos- 
phere, to be unable to stir, and to await some- 
thing unknown, uncomprehendecl, and terri- 
ble, was becoming unbearable. Those stand- 
ing in front, who had seen and heard what had 
taken place before them, all stood with wide- 
open eyes and mouths, straining with all their 
strength, and held back the crowd that was 
pushing behind them. 

"Beat him! . . . Let the traitor perish and 
not disgrace the Russian name!" shouted Ros- 
topchin. "Cut him clown. I command it." 

Hearing not so much the words as the angry 
tone of Rostopchin's voice, the crowd moaned 
and heaved forward, but again paused. 

"Count!" exclaimed the timid yet theatrical 
voice of Vereshchdgin in the midst of the mo- 
mentary silence that ensued, "Count! One God 
is above us both. . . ." He lifted his head and 
again the thick vein in his thin neck filled with 
blood and the color rapidly came and went in 
his face. 

He did not finish what he wished to say. 

"Cut him down! I command it . . ." shouted 
Rostopchfn, suddenly growing pale like Vere- 
shchagin. 

"Draw sabers!" cried the dragoon officer, 
drawing his own. 

Another still stronger wave flowed through 
the crowd and reaching the front ranks carried 
it swaying to the very steps of the porch. The 
tall youth, with a stony look on his face, and 
rigid and uplifted arm, stood beside Veresh- 
chdgin. 

"Saber him!" the dragoon officer almost 
whispered. 

And one of the soldiers, his face all at once 
distorted with fury, struck Vereshchdgin on 
the head with the blunt side of his saber. 

"Ah!" cried Vereshchdgin in meek surprise, 
looking round with a frightened glance as if 
not understanding why this was done to him. 
A similar moan of surprise and horror ran 
through the crowd. "O Lord!" exclaimed a 
sorrowful voice. 

But after the exclamation of surprise that 
had escaped from Vereshchdgin he uttered a 
plaintive cry of pain, and that cry was fatal. 
The barrier of human feeling, strained to the 



BOOK ELEVEN 



utmost, that had held the crowd in check sud- 
denly broke. The crime had begun and must 
now be completed. The plaintive moan of re- 
proach was drowned by the threatening and 
angry roar of the crowd. Like the seventh and 
last wave that shatters a ship, that last irresisti- 
ble wave burst from the rear and reached the 
front ranks, carrying them of! their feet and 
engulfing them all. The dragoon was about to 
repeat his blow. Vereshchagin with a cry of 
horror, covering his head with his hands, rushed 
toward the crowd. The tall youth, against 
whom he stumbled, seized his thin neck with 
his hands and, yelling wildly, fell with him un- 
der the feet of the pressing, struggling crowd. 

Some beat and tore at Vcreshcndgin, others 
at the tall youth. And the screams of those 
that were being trampled on and of those who 
tried to rescue the tall lad only increased the 
fury of the crowd. It was a long time before 
the dragoons could extricate the bleeding 
youth, beaten almost to death. And for a long 
time, despite the feverish haste with which the 
mob tried to end the work that had been be- 
gun, those who were hitting, throttling, and 
tearing at Vereshchagin were unable to kill 
him, for the crowd pressed from all sides, 
swaying as one mass with them in the center 
and rendering it impossible for them either to 
kill him or let him go. 

"Hit him with an ax, eh! . . . Crushed? . . . 
Traitor, he sold Christ . . . Still alive . . . tena- 
cious . . . serve him right! Torture serves a thief 
right. Use the hatchet! . . . What still alive?" 

Only when the victim ceased to struggle and 
his cries changed to a long-drawn, measured 
death rattle did the crowd around his pros- 
trate, bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change 
places. Each one came up, glanced at what had 
been done, and with horror, reproach, and as- 
tonishment pushed back again. 

"O Lord! The people are like wild beasts! 
How could he be alive?" voices in the crowd 
could be heard saying. "Quite a young fellow 
too . . . must have been a merchant's son. What 
men! . . . and they say he's not the right one. 
. . . How not the right one? . . . O Lord! And 
there's another has been beaten too they say 
he's nearly done for. . . . Oh, the people . . . 
Aren't they afraid of sinning? . . ." said the 
same mob now, looking with pained distress at 
the dead body with its long, thin, half-severed 
neck and its livid face stained with blood and 
dust. 

A painstaking police officer, considering the 
presence of a corpse in his excellency's court- 



yard unseemly, told the dragoons to take it 
away. Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs 
and dragged it along the ground. The gory, 
dust-stained, half-shaven head with its long 
neck trailed twisting along the ground. The 
crowd shrank back from it. 

At the moment when Vereshchdgin fell and 
the crowd closed in with savage yells and swayed 
about him, Rostopchin suddenly turned pale 
and, instead of going to the back entrance 
where his carriage awaited him, went with 
hurried steps and bent head, not knowing 
where and why, along the passage leading to 
the rooms on the ground floor. The count's 
face was white and he could not control the 
feverish twitching of his lower jaw. 

"This way, your excellency . . . Where are 
you going? . . . This way, please . . ." said a 
trembling, frightened voice behind him. 

Count Rostopchin was unable to reply and, 
turning obediently, went in the direction in- 
dicated. At the back entrancestood his caliche. 
The distant roar of the yelling crowd was audi- 
ble even there. He hastily took his seat and 
told the coachman to drive him to his country 
house in Sokolniki. 

When they reached the Myasnitski Street 
and could no longer hear the shouts of the 
mob, the count began to repent. He remem- 
bered with dissatisfaction the agitation and 
fear he had betrayed before his subordinates. 
"The mob is terrible disgusting," he said to 
himself in French. "They are like wolves whom 
nothing but flesh can appease." "Count! One 
God is above us both!" Vereshcha* gin's words 
suddenly recurred to him, and a disagreeable 
shiver ran down his back. But this was only a 
momentary feeling and Count Rostopchin 
smiled disdainfully at himself. "I had other 
duties," thought he. "The people had to be 
appeased. Many other victims have perished 
and are perishing for the public good" and 
he began thinking of his social duties to his 
family and to the city entrusted to him, and 
of himself not himself as Theodore Vasilye- 
vich Rostopchin (he fancied that Theodore 
Vasflyevich Rostopchfn was sacrificing him- 
self for the public good) but himself as gov- 
ernor, the representative of authority and of 
the Tsar. "Had I been simply Theodore Vasfl- 
yevich my course of action would have been 
quite different, but it was my duty to safe- 
guard my life and dignity as commander in 
chief." 

Lightly swaying on the flexible springs of nis 
carriage and no longer hearing the terrible 



5 io 



WAR AND PEACE 



sounds of the crowd, Rostopchfn grew physi- 
cally calm and, as always happens, as soon as 
he became physically tranquil his mind de- 
vised reasons why he should be mentally tran- 
quil too. The thought which tranquillized Ros- 
topchfn was not a new one. Since the world be- 
gan and men have killed one another no one 
has ever committed such a crime against his 
fellow man without comforting himself with 
this same idea. This idea is le bien public, the 
hypothetical welfare of other people. 

To a man not swayed by passion that wel- 
fare is never certain, but he who commits such 
a crime always knows just where that welfare 
lies. And Rostopchin now knew it. 

Not only did his reason not reproach him 
for what he had done, but he even found cause 
for self-satisfaction in having so successfully 
contrived to avail himself of a convenient op- 
portunity to punish a criminal and at the same 
time pacify the mob. 

"Vereshchdgin was tried and condemned to 
death," thought Rostopchin (though the Sen- 
ate had only condemned Vereshchagin to hard 
labor), "he was a traitor and a spy. I could not 
let him go unpunished and so I have killed 
two birds with one stone: to appease the mob 
I gave them a victim and at the same time pun- 
ished a miscreant." 

Having reached his country house and be- 
gun to give orders about domestic arrange- 
ments, the count grew quite tranquil. 

Half an hour later he was driving with his 
fast horses across the Sok61niki field, no longer 
thinking of what had occurred but considering 
what was to come. He was driving to the Yaiiza 
bridge where he had heard that Kutuzov was. 
Count Rostopchfn was mentally preparing the 
angry and stinging reproaches he meant to 
address to Kutuzov for his deception. He 
would make that foxy old courtier feel that 
the responsibility for all the calamities that 
would follow the abandonment of the city and 
the ruin of Russia (as Rostopchin regarded it) 
would fall upon his doting old head. Planning 
beforehand what he would say to Kutuzov, 
Rostopchfn turned angrily in his caliche and 
gazed sternly from side to side. 

The Sok61niki field was deserted. Only at 
the end of it, in front of the almshouse and the 
lunatic asylum, could be seen some people in 
white and others like them walking singly 
across the field shouting and gesticulating. 

One of these was running to cross the path 
of Count Rostopchfn's carriage, and the count 
himself, his coachman, jnd his dragoons looked 



with vague horror and curiosity at these re- 
leased lunatics and especially at the one run- 
ning toward them. 

Swaying from side to side on his long, thin 
legs in his fluttering dressing gown, this luna- 
tic was running impetuously, his gaze fixed on 
Rostopchin, shouting something in a hoarse 
voice and making signs to him to stop. The 
lunatic's solemn, gloomy face was thin and 
yellow, with its beard growing in uneven tufts. 
His black, agate pupils with saffron-yellow 
whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids. 

"Stop! Pull up, I tell you!" he cried in a 
piercing voice, and again shouted something 
breathlessly with emphatic intonations and 
gestures. 

Coming abreast of the caliche he ran be- 
side it. 

"Thrice have they slain me, thrice have I 
risen from the dead. They stoned me, crucified 
me ... I shall rise . . . shall rise . . . shall rise. 
They have torn my body. The kingdom of God 
will be overthrown . . . Thrice will I overthrow 
it and thrice re-establish it!" he cried, raising 
his voice higher and higher. 

Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he 
had done when the crowd closed in on Veresh- 
cMgin. He turned away. "Go fas ... faster!" 
he cried in a trembling voice to his coachman. 
The caliche flew over the ground as fast as the 
horses could draw it, but for a long time Count 
Rostopchin still heard the insane despairing 
screams growing fainter in the distance, while 
his eyes saw nothing but the astonished, fright- 
ened, bloodstained face of "the traitor" in the 
fur-lined coat. 

Recent as that mental picture was, Rostop- 
chfn already felt that it had cut deep into his 
heart and drawn blood. Even now he felt clear- 
ly that the gory trace of that recollection would 
not pass with time, but that the terrible mem- 
ory would, on the contrary, dwell in his heart 
ever more cruelly and painfully to the end of 
his life. He seemed still to hear the sound of 
his own words: "Cut him down! I command 
it " 

"Why did I utter those words? It was by some 
accident I said them. ... I need not have said 
them," he thought. "And then nothing would 
have happened." He saw the frightened and 
then infuriated face of the dragoon who dealt 
the blow, the look of silent, timid reproach 
that boy in the fur-lined coat had turned upon 
him. "But I did not do it for my own sake. I 
was bound to act that way. . . . The mob, the 
traitor . . . the public welfare," thought he. 



BOOK ELEVEN 



Troops were still crowding at the Yauza 
bridge. It was hot. Kutuzov, dejected and 
frowning, sat on a bench by the bridge toying 
with his whip in the sand when a caliche 
dashed up noisily. A man in a general's uni- 
form with plumes in his hat went up to Kutti- 
zov and said something in French. It was Count 
Rostopchfn. He told Kutuzov that he had come 
because Moscow, the capital, was no more and 
only the army remained. 

"Things would have been different if your 
Serene Highness had not told me that you 
would not abandon Moscow without another 
battle; all this would not have happened," he 
said. 

Kutuzov looked at Rostopchfn as if, not 
grasping what was said to him, he was trying 
to read something peculiar written at that mo- 
ment on the face of the man addressing him. 
Rostopchfn grew confused and became silent. 
Kutuzov slightly shook his head and not tak- 
ing his penetrating gaze from Rostopchfn's 
face muttered softly: 

"No! I shall not give up Moscow without a 
battle!" 

Whether Kutuzovwas thinkingofsomething 
entirely different when he spoke those words, 
or uttered them purposely, knowing them to 
be meaningless, at any rate Rostopchfn made 
no reply and hastily left him. And strange to 
say, the Governor of Moscow, the proud Count 
Rostopchfn, took up a Cossack whip and went 
to the bridge where he began with shouts to 
drive on the carts that blocked the way. 

CHAPTER XXVI 

TOWARD FOUR O'CLOCK in the afternoon Mur- 
at's troops were entering Moscow. In front rode 
a detachment of Wiirttemberg hussars and be- 
hind them rode the King of Naples himself 
accompanied by a numerous suite. 

About the middle of the Arbat Street, near 
the Church of the Miraculous Icon of St. 
Nicholas, Murat halted to await news from the 
advanced detachment as to the condition in 
which they had found the citadel, le Kremlin. 

Around Murat gathered a group of those 
who had remained in Moscow. They all stared 
in timid bewilderment at the strange, long- 
haired commander dressed up in feathers and 
gold. 

"Is that their Tsar himself? He's not bad!" 
low voices could be heard saying. 

An interpreter rode up to the group. 

"Take off your cap . . . your caps!" These 
words went from one to another in the crowd. 



The interpreter addressed an old porter and 
asked if it was far to the Kremlin. The porter, 
listening in perplexity to the unfamiliar Polish 
accent and not realizing that the interpreter 
was speaking Russian, did not understand 
what was being said to him and slipped be- 
hind the others. 

Murat approached the interpreter and told 
him to ask where the Russian army was. One 
of the Russians understood what was asked 
and several voices at once began answering 
the interpreter. A French officer, returning 
from the advanced detachment, rode up to 
Murat and reported that the gates of the cita- 
del had been barricaded and that there was 
probably an ambuscade there. 

"Good!" said Murat and, turning to one of 
the gentlemen in his suite, ordered four light 
guns to be moved forward to fire at the gates. 

The guns emerged at a trot from the column 
following Murat and advanced up the Arbat. 
When they reached the end of the Vozdvfzhen- 
ka Street they halted and drew up in the Square. 
Several French officers superintended the plac- 
ing of the guns and looked at the Kremlin 
through field glasses. 

The bells in the Kremlin were ringing for 
vespers, and this sound troubled the French. 
They imagined it to be a call to arms. A few 
infantrymen ran to the Kutdfyev Gate. Beams 
and wooden screens had been put there, and 
two musket shots rang out from under the gate 
as soon as an officer and men began to run 
toward it. A general who was standing by the 
guns shouted some words of command to the 
officer, and the latter ran back again with his 
men . 

The sound of three more shots came from 
the gate. 

One shot struck a French soldier's foot, and 
from behind the screens came the strange 
sound of a few voices shouting. Instantly as at 
a word of command the expression of cheerful 
serenity on the faces of the French general, of- 
ficers, and men changed to one of determined 
concentrated readiness for strife and suffering. 
To all of them from the marshal to the least 
soldier, that place was not the Vozdvizhenka, 
Mokhavaya, or Kutdfyev Street, nor the Trd- 
itsa Gate (places familiar in Moscow), but a 
new battlefield which would probably prove 
sanguinary. And all made ready for that battle. 
The cries from the gates ceased. The guns 
were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ash 
off their linstocks, and an officer gave the word 
"Fire!" This was followed by two whistling 



5** 



WAR AND PEACE 



sounds of canister shot, one after another. The 
shot rattled against the stone of the gate and 
upon the wooden beams and screens, and two 
wavering clouds of smoke rose over the Square. 

A few instants after the echo of the reports 
resounding over the stone-built Kremlin had 
died away the French heard a strange sound 
above their head. Thousands of crows rose 
above the walls and circled in the air, cawing 
and noisily flapping their wings. Together with 
that sound came a solitary human cry from the 
gateway and amid the smoke appeared the fig- 
ure of a bareheaded man in a peasant's coat. 
He grasped a musket and took aim at the 
French. "Fire!" repeated the officer once more, 
and the reports of a musket and of two cannon 
shots were heard simultaneously. The gate was 
again hidden by smoke. 

Nothing more stirred behind the screens 
and the French infantry soldiers and officers 
advanced to the gate. In the gateway lay three 
wounded and four dead. Two men in peasant 
coats ran away at the foot of the wall, toward 
the Znmenka. 

"Clear that away!" said the officer, pointing 
to the beams and the corpses, and the French 
soldiers, after dispatching the wounded, threw 
the corpses over the parapet. 

Who these men were nobody knew. "Clear 
that away!" was all that was said of them, and 
they were thrown over the parapet and re- 
moved later on that they might not stink. 
Thiers alone dedicates a few eloquent lines to 
their memory: "These wretches had occupied 
the sacred citadel, having supplied themselves 
with guns from the arsenal, and fired" (the 
wretches) "at the French. Some of them were 
sabered and the Kremlin was purged of their 
presence." 

Murat was informed that the way had been 
cleared. The French entered the gates and be- 
gan pitching their camp in the Senate Square. 
Out of the windows of the Senate House the 
soldiers threw chairs into the Square for fuel 
and kindled fires there. 

Other detachments passed through the Kre*m- 
lin and encamped along the Moros^yka, the 
Lubynka, and Pokr6vka Streets. Others quar- 
tered themselves along the Vozdvizhenka, the 
Nik61ski, and the Tversk6y Streets. No masters 
of the houses being found any where, the French 
were not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual 
in towns but lived in it as in a camp. 

Though tattered, hungry, worn out, and re- 
duced to a third of their original number, the 
French entered Moscow in good marching or- 



der. It was a weary and famished, but still a 
fighting and menacing army. But it remained 
an army only until its soldiers had dispersed 
into their different lodgings. As soon ^.s the 
men of the various regiments began td dis- 
perse among the wealthy and deserted hotises, 
the army was lost forever and there came into 
being something nondescript, neither citizens 
nor soldiers but what are known as marauders. 
When five weeks later these same men left Mos- 
cow, they no longer formed an army. They 
were a mob of marauders, each carrying a 
quantity of articles which seemed to him valu- 
able or useful. The aim of each man when he 
left Moscow was no longer, as it had been, to 
conquer, but merely to keep what he had ac- 
quired. Like a monkey which puts its paw in- 
to the narrow neck of a jug, and having seized 
a handful of nuts will not open its fist for fear 
of losing what it holds, and therefore perishes, 
the French when they left Moscow had inevi- 
tably to perish because they carried their loot 
with them, yet to abandon what they had stolen 
was as impossible for them as it is for the mon- 
key to open its paw and let go of its nuts. Ten 
minutes after each regiment had entered a 
Moscow district, not a soldier or officer was left. 
Men in military uniforms and Hessian boots 
could be seen through the windows, laughing 
and walking through the rooms. In cellars and 
storerooms similar men were busy among the 
provisions, and in the yards unlocking or 
breaking open coach house and stable doors, 
lighting fires in kitchens and kneading and 
baking bread with rolled-up sleeves, and cook- 
ing; or frightening, amusing, or caressing wom- 
en and children. There were many such men 
both in the shops and houses but there was 
no army. 

Order after order was issued by the French 
commanders that day forbidding the men to 
disperse about the town, sternly forbidding 
any violence to the inhabitants or any looting, 
and announcing a roll call for that very eve- 
ning. But despite all these measures the men, 
who had till then constituted an army, flowed 
all over the wealthy, deserted city with its com- 
forts and plentiful supplies. As a hungry herd 
of cattle keeps well together when crossing a 
barren field, but gets out of hand and at once 
disperses uncontrollably as soon as it reaches 
rich pastures, so did the army disperse all over 
the wealthy city. 

No residents were left in Moscow, and the 
soldiers like water percolating through sand 
spread irresistibly through the city in all di- 



BOOK ELEVEN 



513 



rections from the Kremlin into which they had 
first marched. The cavalry, on entering a mer- 
chant's house that had been abandoned and 
finding there stabling more than sufficient for 
their horses, went on, all the same, to the next 
house which seemed to them better. Many of 
them appropriated several houses, chalked their 
names on them, and quarreled and even fought 
with other companies for them. Before they 
had had time to secure quarters the soldiers 
ran out into the streets to see the city and, 
hearing that everything had been abandoned, 
rushed to places where valuables were to be 
had for the taking. The officers followed to 
check the soldiers and were involuntarily drawn 
into doing the same. In Carriage Row carriages 
had been left in the shops, and generals flocked 
there to select caleches and coaches for them- 
selves. The few inhabitants who had remained 
invited commanding officers to their houses, 
hoping thereby to secure themselves from be- 
ing plundered. There were masses of wealth 
and there seemed no end to it. All around the 
quarters occupied by the French were other 
regions still unexplored and unoccupied where, 
they thought, yet greater riches might be 
found. And Moscow engulfed the army ever 
deeper and deeper. When water is spilled on 
dry ground both the dry ground and the water 
disappear and mud results; and in the same 
way the entry of the famished army into the 
rich and deserted city resulted in fires and loot- 
ing and the destruction of both the army and 
the wealthy city. 

The French attributed the Fire of Moscow 
au patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine? the 
Russians to the barbarity of the French. In 
reality, however, it was not, and could not be, 
possible to explain the burning of Moscow by 
making any individual, or any group of peo- 
ple, responsible for it. Moscow was burned be- 
cause it found itself in a position in which any 
town built of wood was bound to burn, quite 
apart from whether it had, or had not, a hun- 
dred and thirty inferior fire engines. Deserted 
Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of 
shavings has to burn on which sparks continu- 
ally fall for several days. A town built of wood, 
where scarcely a clay passes without conflagra- 
tions when the house owners are in residence 
and a police force is present, cannot help burn- 
ing when its inhabitants have left it and it is 
occupied by soldiers who smoke pipes, make 
campfires of the Senate chairs in the Senate 

1 To Rostopchfn's ferocious patriotism. 



Square, and cook themselves meals twice a day. 
In peacetime it is only necessary to billet troops 
in the villages of any district and the number 
of fires in that district immediately increases. 
How much then must the probability of fire 
be increased in an abandoned, wooden town 
where foreign troops are quartered. "Le patrio- 
tisme feroce deRostopchine"and the barbarity 
of the French were not to blame in the matter. 
Moscow was set on fire by the soldiers' pipes, 
kitchens, and campfires, and by the careless- 
ness of-enemy soldiers occupying houses they 
did not own. Even if there was any arson (which 
is very doubtful, for no one had any reason to 
burn the houses in any case a troublesome 
and dangerous thing to do), arson cannot be 
regarded as the cause, for the same thing would 
have happened without any incendiarism. 

However tempting it might be for the French 
to blame Rostopchfn's ferocity and for Rus- 
sians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte, or 
later on to place an heroic torch in the hands 
of their own people, it is impossible not to see 
that there could be no such direct cause of the 
fire, for Moscow had to burn as every village, 
factory, or house must burn which is left by its 
owners and in which strangers are allowed to 
live and cook their porridge. Moscow was 
burned by its inhabitants, it is true, but by 
those who had abandoned it and not by those 
who remained in it. Moscow when occupied 
by the enemy did not remain intact like Berlin, 
Vienna, and other towns, simply because its 
inhabitants abandoned it and did not wel- 
come the French with bread and salt, nor bring 
them the keys of the city. 

CHAPTER XXVII 

THE ABSORPTION of the French by Moscow, ra- 
diating starwise as it did, only reached the 
quarter where Pierre was staying by the eve- 
ning of the second of September. 

After the last two days spent in solitude and 
unusual circumstances, Pierre was in a state 
bordering on insanity. He was completely ob- 
sessed by one persistent thought. He did not 
know how or when this thought had taken 
such possession of him, but he remembered 
nothing of the past, understood nothing of 
the present, and all he saw and heard ap- 
peared to him like a dream. 

He had left home only to escape the intri- 
cate tangle of life's demands that enmeshed 
him, and which in his present condition he was 
unable to unravel. He had gone to Joseph 
Alexe*evich's house, on the plea of sorting the 



WAR AND PEACE 



deceased's books and papers, only in search of 
rest from life's turmoil, for in his mind the 
memory of Joseph Alexevich was connected 
with a world of eternal, solemn, and calm 
thoughts, quite contrary to the restless confu- 
sion into which he felt himself being drawn. 
He sought a quiet refuge, and in Joseph Alex- 
evich's study he really found it. When he sat 
with his elbows on the dusty writing table in 
the deathlike stillness of the study, calm and 
significant memories of the last few days rose 
one after another in his imagination, particu- 
larly of the battle of Borodin6 and of that 
vague sense of his own insignificance and in- 
sincerity compared with the truth, simplicity, 
and strength of the class of men he mentally 
classed as they. When Gerdsim roused him 
from his reverie the idea occurred to him of 
taking part in the popular defense of Moscow 
which he knew was projected. And with that 
object he had asked Gerdsim to get him a peas- 
ant's coat and a pistol, confiding to him his in- 
tentions of remaining in Joseph Alexevich's 
house and keeping his name secret. Then dur- 
ing the first day spent in inaction and solitude 
(he tried several times to fix his attention on 
the Masonic manuscripts, but was unable to 
do so) the idea that had previously occurred to 
him of the cabalistic significance of his name 
in connection with Bonaparte's more than 
once vaguely presented itself. But the idea that 
he, L'russe Besuhof, was destined to set a limit 
to the power of the Beast was as yet only one 
of the fancies that often passed through his 
mind and left no trace behind. 

When, having bought the coat merely with 
the object of taking part among the people in 
the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met the 
Rost6vs and Natdsha had said to him: "Are 
you remaining in Moscow? . . . How splendid!" 
the thought flashed into his mind that it really 
would be a good thing, even if Moscow were 
taken, for him to remain there and do what 
he was predestined to do. 

Next day, with the sole idea of not sparing 
himself and not lagging in any way behind 
them, Pierre went to the Three Hills gate. But 
when he returned to the house convinced that 
Moscow would not be defended, he suddenly 
felt that what before had seemed to him mere- 
ly a possibility had now become absolutely nec- 
essary and inevitable. He must remain in Mos- 
cow, concealing his name, and must meet Na- 
poleon and kill him, and either perish or put 
an end to the misery of all Europe which it 
seemed to him was solely due to Napoleon. 



Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on 
Bonaparte's life in 1809 by a German student 
in Vienna, and knew that the student had been 
shot. And the risk to which he would expose 
his life by carrying out his design excited him 
still more. 

Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre ir- 
resistibly to this purpose. The first was a feel- 
ing of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering in 
view of the common calamity, the same feeling 
that had caused him to go to Mozhdysk on the 
twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very 
thick of the battle and had now caused him to 
run away from his home and, in place of the 
luxury and comfort to which he was accus- 
tomed, to sleep on a hard sofa without undress- 
ing and eat the same food as Gerdsim. The oth- 
er was that vague and quite Russian feeling of 
contempt for everything conventional, artifi- 
cial, and human for everything the majority 
of men regard as the greatest good in the world. 
Pierre had first experienced this strange and 
fascinating feeling at the Slob6da Palace, when 
he had suddenly felt that wealth, power, and 
lifeall that men so painstakingly acquire and 
guard if it has any worth has so only by rea- 
son of the joy with which it can all be renounced. 

It was the feeling that induces a volunteer 
recruit to spend his last penny on drink, and 
a drunken man to smash mirrors or glasses for 
no apparent reason and knowing that it will 
cost him all the money he possesses: the feel- 
ing which causes a man to perform actions 
which from an ordinary point of view are in- 
sane, to test, as it were, his personal power and 
strength, affirming the existence of a higher, 
no n human criterion of life. 

From the very day Pierre had experienced 
this feeling for the first time at the Slob6da 
Palace he had been continuously under its in- 
fluence, but only now found full satisfaction 
for it. Moreover, at this moment Pierre was 
supported in his design and prevented from 
renouncing it by what he had already done in 
that direction. If he were now to leave Mos- 
cow like everyone else, his flight from home, 
the peasant coat, the pistol, and his announce- 
ment to the Rost6vs that he would remain in 
Moscow would all become not merely mean- 
ingless but contemptible and ridiculous, and 
to this Pierre was very sensitive. 

Pierre's physical condition, as is always the 
case, corresponded to his mental state. The 
unaccustomed coarse food, the vodka he drank 
during those days, the absence of wine and 
cigars, his dirty unchanged linen, two almost 



BOOK ELEVEN 



sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without 
bedding all this kept him in a state of excite- 
ment bordering on insanity. 

It was two o'clock in the afternoon. The 
French had already entered Moscow. Pierre 
knew this, but instead of acting he only thought 
about his undertaking, going over its minutest 
details in his mind. In his fancy he did not 
clearly picture to himself either the striking of 
the blow or the death of Napoleon, but with 
extraordinary vividness and melancholy en- 
joyment imagined his own destruction and 
heroic endurance. 

"Yes, alone, for the sake of all, I must do it 
or perish I" he thought. "Yes, I will approach 
. . . and then suddenly . . . with pistol or dag- 
ger? But that is all the same! 'It is not I but 
the hand of Providence that punishes thee,' I 
shall say," thought he, imagining what he would 
say when killing Napoleon. "Well then, take 
me and execute me!" he went on, speaking to 
himself and bowing his head with a sad but 
firm expression. 

While Pierre, standing in the middle of the 
room, was talking to himself in this way, the 
study door opened and on the threshold ap- 
peared the figure of Makar Alexevich, always 
so timid before but now quite transformed. 

His dressing gown was unfastened, his face 
red and distorted. He was obviously drunk. On 
seeing Pierre he grew confused at first, but 
noticing embarrassment on Pierre's face im- 
mediately grew bold and, staggering on his 
thin legs, advanced into the middle of the 
room. 

"They're frightened," he said confidentially 
in a hoarse voice. "I say I won't surrender, I 
say . . . Am I not right, sir?" 

He paused and then suddenly seeing the 
pistol on the table seized it with unexpected 
rapidity and ran out into the corridor. 

Gerdsim and the porter, who had followed 
Makar Alexevich, stopped him in the vesti- 
bule and tried to take the pistol from him. 
Pierre, coming out into the corridor, looked 
with pity and repulsion at the half-crazy old 
man. Makar Alexdevich, frowning with exer- 
tion, held on to the pistol and screamed hoarse- 
ly, evidently with some heroic fancy in his 
head. 

"To arms! Board them! No, you shan't get 
it," he yelled. 

"That will do, please, that will do. Have the 
goodness please, sir, to let go! Please, sir . . ." 
pleaded Geraim, trying carefully to steer Ma- 
kar Alexevich by the elbows back to the door. 



5*5 
shouted 



"Who are you? Bonaparte! . 
Makar Alexevich. 

"That's not right, sir. Come to your room, 
please, and rest. Allow me to have the pistol." 

"Be off, thou base slave! Touch me not! See 
this?" shouted Makar Alex^evich, brandish- 
ing the pistol. "Board them!" 

"Catch hold!" whispered Gerdsim to the 
porter. 

They seized Makar Alex^evich by the arms 
and dragged him to the door. 

The vestibule was filled with the discordant 
sounds of a struggle and of a tipsy, hoarse 
voice. 

Suddenly a fresh sound, a piercing feminine 
scream, reverberated from the porch and the 
cook came running into the vestibule. 

"It's them! Gracious heavens! O Lord, four 
of them, horsemen!" she cried. 

Gerdsim and the porter let Makar Alexe*- 
evich go, and in the now silent corridor the 
sound of several hands knocking at the front 
door could be heard. 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

PIERRE, having decided that until he had car- 
ried out his design he would disclose neither 
his identity nor his knowledge of French, stood 
at the half-open door of the corridor, intend- 
ing to conceal himself as soon as the French 
entered. But the French entered and still Pierre 
did not retire an irresistible curiosity kept 
him there. 

There were two of them. One was an officer 
a tall, soldierly, handsome man the other 
evidently a private or an orderly, sunburned, 
short, and thin, with sunken cheeks and a dull 
expression. The officer walked in front, lean- 
ing on a stick and slightly limping. When he 
had advanced a few steps he stopped, having 
apparently decided that these were good quar- 
ters, turned round to the soldiers standing at 
the entrance, and in a loud voice of command 
ordered them to put up the horses. Having 
done that, the officer, lifting his elbow with a 
smart gesture, stroked hjs mustache and light- 
ly touched his hat. 

"Bon/our, la compagnie!"* said he gaily, 
smiling and looking about him. 

No one gave any reply. 

"Vous ties le bourgeois!" * the officer asked 
Gerasim. 

Gerdsim gazed at the officer with an alarmed 
and inquiring look. 

1 "Good day, everybody!" 
1 "Are you the master nere?" 



WAR ANi&gt; PEACE 



"Quartier, quartier, logement!" said the of- 
ficer, looking down at the little man with a con- 
descending and good-natured smile. "Les fran- 
caissont de bons enfants. Que diable! Voyons! 
Ne nous factions pas, mon vieux!" * added he, 
clapping the scared and silent Gerdsim on the 
shoulder. "Well, does no one speak French in 
this establishment?" he asked again in French, 
looking around and meeting Pierre's eyes. 
Pierre moved away from the door. 

Again the officer turned to Gerdsim and 
asked him to show him the rooms in the house. 

"Master, not here don't understand . . . me, 
you . . ." said Gerasim, trying to render his 
words more comprehensible by contorting 
them. 

Still smiling, the French officer spread out 
his hands before Gerasim's nose, intimating 
that he did not understand him either, and 
moved, limping, to the door at which Pierre 
was standing. Pierre wished to go away and 
conceal himself, but at that moment he saw 
Makar Alexdevichappcaringat the open kitch- 
en door with the pistol in his hand. With a 
madman's cunning, Makar Alexe"evicheyed the 
Frenchman, raised his pistol, and took aim. 

"Board them!" yelled the tipsy man, trying 
to press the trigger. Hearing the yell the officer 
turned round, and at the same moment Pierre 
threw himself on the drunkard. Just when 
Pierre snatched at and struck up the pistol Ma- 
kdr Alex^evich at last got his fingerson the trig- 
ger, there was a deafening report, and all were 
enveloped in a cloud of smoke. The French- 
man turned pale and rushed to the door. 

Forgetting his intention of concealing his 
knowledge of French, Pierre, snatching away 
the pistol and throwing it down, ran up to the 
officer and addressed him in French. 

"You are not wounded?" he asked. 

"I think not," answered the Frenchman, 
feeling himself over. "But I have had a lucky 
escape this time," he added, pointing to the 
damaged plaster of the wall. "Who is that man?" 
said he, looking sternly at Pierre. 

"Oh, I am really in despair at what has oc- 
curred," said Pierre rapidly, quite forgetting 
the part he had intended to play. "He is an un- 
fortunate madman who did not know what he 
was doing." 

The officer went up to Makdr Alex^evichand 
took him by the collar. 

Makar Alexeevich was standing with parted 

1 "Quarters, quarters, lodgings! The French are 
good fellows. What the devil! There, don't let us 
be cross, old fellow!" 



lips, swaying, as if about to fall asleep, as he 
leaned against the wall. 

"Brigand! You shall pay for this," said the 
Frenchman, letting go of him. "We French are 
merciful after victory, but we do not pardon 
traitors," he added, with a look of gloomy dig- 
nity and a fine energetic gesture. 

Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the 
officer not to hold that drunken imbecile to ac- 
count. The Frenchman listened in silence with 
the same gloomy expression, but suddenly 
turned to Pierre with a smile. For a few sec- 
onds he looked at him in silence. His hand- 
some face assumed a melodramatically gentle 
expression arid he held out his hand. 

"You have saved my life. You are French," 
said he. 

For a Frenchman that deduction was indu- 
bitable. Only a Frenchman could perform a 
great deed, and to save his life the life of M. 
Ramballc, captain of the igth Light Regiment 
was undoubtedly a very great deed. 

But however indubitable that conclusion and 
the officer's conviction based upon it, Pierre 
felt it necessary to disillusion him. 

"I am Russian," he said quickly. 

"Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others," said the 
officer, waving his finger before his nose and 
smiling. "You shall tell me all about that pres- 
ently. I am delighted to meet a compatriot. 
Well, and what are we to do with this man?" 
he added, addressing himself to Pierre as to a 
brother. 

Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman, hav- 
ing once received that loftiest of human appel- 
lations he could not renounce it, said the offi- 
cer's look and tone. In reply to his last question 
Pierre again explained who Makar Alexeevich 
was and how just before their arrival that 
drunken imbecile had seized the loaded pistol 
which they had not had time to recover from 
him, and begged the officer to let the deed go 
unpunished. 

The Frenchman expanded his chest and 
made a majestic gesture with his arm. 

"You have saved my life! You are French. 
You ask his pardon? I grant it you. Lead that 
man away!" said he quickly and energetically, 
and taking the arm of Pierre whom he had 
promoted to be a Frenchman for saving his 
life, he went with him into the room. 

The soldiers in the yard, hearing the shot, 
came into the passage asking what had hap- 
pened, and expressed their readiness to punish 
the culprits, but the officer sternly checked 
them. 



BOOK ELEVEN 



"You will be called in when you are wanted," 
he said. 

The soldiers went out again, and the order- 
ly, who had meanwhile had time to visit the 
kitchen, came up to his officer. 

"Captain, there is soup and a leg of mutton 
in the kitchen," said he. "Shall I serve them 
up?" 

"Yes, and some wine," answered the cap- 
tain. 

CHAPTER XXIX 

WHEN THE FRENCH OFFICER went into the room 
with Pierre the latter again thought it his duty 
to assure him that he was not French and 
wished to go away, but the officer would not 
hear of it. He was so very polite, amiable, good- 
natured, and genuinely grateful to Pierre for 
saving his life that Pierre had not the heart to 
refuse, and sat down with him in the parlor 
the first room they entered. To Pierre's as- 
surances that he was not a Frenchman, the 
captain, evidently not understanding how any- 
one could decline so flattering an appellation, 
shrugged his shoulders and said that if Pierre 
absolutely insisted on passing for a Russian 
let it be so, but for all that he would be for- 
ever bound to Pierre by gratitude for saving 
his life. 

Had this man been endowed with the slight- 
est capacity for perceiving the feelings of oth- 
ers, and had he at all understood what Pierre's 
feelings were, the latter would probably have 
left him, but the man's animated obtuseness 
to everything other than himself disarmed 
Pierre. 

"A Frenchman or a Russian prince incog- 
nito," said the officer, looking at Pierre's fine 
though dirty linen and at the ring on his fin- 
ger. "I owe my life to you and offer you my 
friendship. A Frenchman never forgets either 
an insult or a service. I offer you my friendship. 
That is all I can say." 

There was so much good nature and nobility 
(in the French sense of the word) in the officer's 
voice, in the expression of his face and in his 
gestures, that Pierre, unconsciously smiling in 
response to the Frenchman's smile, pressed the 
hand held out to him. 

"Captain Ramballe, of the 131!! Light Reg- 
iment, Chevalier of the Legion of Honor for 
the affair on the seventh of September," he in- 
troduced himself, a self-satisfied irrepressible 
smile puckering his lips under his mustache. 
"Will you now be so good as to tell me with 
whom I have the honor of conversing so pleas- 



antly, instead of being in the ambulance with 
that maniac's bullet in my body?" 

Pierre replied that he could not tell him 
his name and, blushing, began to try to invent 
a name and to say something about his reason 
for concealing it, but the Frenchman hastily 
interrupted him. 

"Oh, please!" said he. "I understand your 
reasons. You are an officer ... a superior officer 
perhaps. You have borne arms against us. 
That's not my business. I owe you my life. 
That is enough for me. I am quite at your serv- 
ice. You belong to the gentry?" he concluded 
with a shade of inquiry in his tone. Pierre bent 
his head. "Your baptismal name, if you please. 
That is all I ask. Monsieur Pierre, you say. . . . 
Excellent! That's all I want to know." 

When the mutton and an omelet had been 
served and a samovar and vodka brought, with 
some wine which the French had taken from 
a Russian cellar and brought with them, Ram- 
balle invited Pierre to share his dinner, and 
himself began to eat greedily and quickly like 
a healthy and hungry man, munching his food 
rapidly with his strong teeth, continually 
smacking his lips, and repeating "Excellent! 
Delicious!" His face grew red and was covered 
with perspiration. Pierre was hungry and 
shared the dinner with pleasure. Morel, the 
orderly, brought some hot water in a saucepan 
and placed a bottle of claret in it. He also 
brought a bottle of kvass, taken from the kitch- 
en for them to try. That beverage was already 
known to the French and had been given a 
special name. They called it limonade de co- 
chon (pig's lemonade), and Morel spoke well 
of the limonade de cochon he had found in the 
kitchen. But as the captain had the wine they 
had taken while passing through Moscow, he 
left the kvass to Morel and applied himself to 
the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bot- 
tle up to its neck in a table napkin and poured 
out wine for himself and for Pierre. The satis- 
faction of his hunger and the wine rendered 
the captain still more lively and he chatted in- 
cessantly all through dinner. 

"Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a 
fine votive candle for saving me from that 
maniac. . . . You see, I have bullets enough in 
my body already. Here is one I got at Wagram" 
(he touched his side) "and a second at Smo- 
tensk" he showed a scar on his cheek "and 
this leg which as you see does not want to 
march, I got that on the seventh at the great 
battle of la Moskowa. Sacrd Dieu! It was splen- 
did! That deluge of fire was worth seeing. It 



WAR AND PEACE 



was a tough job you set us there, my word! 
You may be proud of it! And on my honor, in 
spite of the cough I caught there, I should be 
ready to begin again. I pity those who did not 
see it." 

"I was there," said Pierre. 

"Bah, really? So much the betterl You are 
certainly brave foes. The great redoubt held 
out well, by my pipe!" continued the French- 
man. "And you made us pay dear for it. I was 
at it three times sure as I sit here. Three 
times we reached the guns and three times we 
were thrown back like cardboard figures. Oh, it 
was beautiful, Monsieur Pierre! Your grena- 
diers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them 
close up their ranks six times in succession and 
march as if on parade. Fine fellows! Our King 
of Naples, who knows what's what, cried 
'Bravo!' Ha, ha! So you are one of us soldiers!" 
he added, smiling, after a momentary pause. 
"So much the better, so much the better, Mon- 
sieur Pierre! Terrible in battle . . . gallant . . . 
with the fair" (he winked and smiled), "that's 
what the French are, Monsieur Pierre, aren't 
they?" 

The captain was so naively and good-humor- 
edly gay, so real, and so pleased with himself 
that Pierre almost winked back as he looked 
merrily at him. Probably the word "gallant" 
turned the captain's thoughts to the state of 
Moscow. 

"Apropos, tell me please, is it true that the 
women have all left Moscow? What a queer 
idea! What had they to be afraid of?" 

"Would not the French ladies leave Paris if 
the Russians entered it?" asked Pierre. 

"Ha, ha, ha!" The Frenchman emitted a 
merry, sanguine chuckle, patting Pierre on the 
shoulder. "What a thing to say!" he exclaimed. 
"Paris? . . . But Paris, Paris . . ." 

"Paris the capital of the world," Pierre fin- 
ished his remark for him. 

The captain looked at Pierre. He had a hab- 
it of stoppingshort in the middle of his talk and 
gazing intently with his laughing, kindly eyes. 

"Well, if you hadn't told me you were Rus- 
sian, I should have wagered that you were 
Parisian! You have that ... I don't know what, 
that . . ." and having uttered this compliment, 
he again gazed at him in silence. 

"I have been in Paris. I spent years there," 
said Pierre. 

"Oh yes, one sees that plainly. Paris! ... A 
man who doesn't know Paris is a savage. You 
can tell a Parisian two leagues off. Paris is Tal- 
ma, la Duch^nois, Potier, the Sorbonne, the 



boulevards," x and noticing that his conclusion 
was weaker than what had gone before, he add- 
ed quickly: "There is only one Paris in the 
world. You have been to Paris and have re- 
mained Russian. Well, I don't esteem you the 
less for it." 

Under the influence of the wine he had 
drunk, and after the days he had spent alone 
with his depressing thoughts, Pierre involun- 
tarily enjoyed talking with this cheerful and 
good-natured man. 

"To return to your ladies I hear they are 
lovely. What a wretched idea to go and bury 
themselves in the steppes when the French ar- 
my is in Moscow. What a chance those girls 
have missed! Your peasants, now that's an- 
other thing; but you civilized people, you 
ought to know us better than that. We took 
Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome, War- 
saw, all the world's capitals. . . . We are feared, 
but we are loved. We are nice to know. And 
then the Emperor . . ." he began, but Pierre 
interrupted him. 

"The Emperor," Pierre repeated, and his 
face suddenly became sad and embarrassed, 
"is the Emperor . . .?" 

"The Emperor? He is generosity, mercy, jus- 
tice, order, genius that's what the Emperor 
is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so. ... I assure 
you I was his enemy eight years ago. My fa- 
ther was an emigrant count. . . . But that man 
has vanquished me. He has taken hold of me. 
I could not resist the sight of the grandeur and 
glory with which he has covered France. When 
I understood what he wanted when I saw 
that he was preparing a bed of laurels for us, 
you know, I said to myself: 'That is a monarch/ 
and I devoted myself to him! So there! Oh yes, 
mon cher, he is the greatest man of the ages 
past or future." 

"Is he in Moscow?" Pierre stammered with a 
guilty look. 

The Frenchman looked at his guilty face 
and smiled. 

"No, he will make his entry tomorrow," he 
replied, and continued his talk. 

Their conversation was interrupted by the 
cries of several voices at the gate and by Morel, 
who came to say that some Wurttemberg hus- 
sars had come and wanted to put up their 
horses in the yard where the captain's horses 
were. This difficulty had arisen chiefly because 
the hussars did not understand what was said 
to them in French. 

1 The famous tragedian Talma, the actress Du- 
che'nois, the comedian Potier. TR. 



The captain had their senior sergeant called 
in, and in a stern voice asked him to what reg- 
iment he belonged, who was his commanding 
officer, and by what right he allowed himself 
to claim quarters that were already occupied. 
The German who knew little French, answered 
the two first questions by giving the names of 
his regiment and of his commanding officer, 
but in reply to the third question which he did 
not understand said, introducing broken 
French into his own German, that he was the 
quartermaster of the regiment and his com- 
mander had ordered him to occupy all the 
houses one after another. Pierre, who knew 
German, translated what the German said to 
the captain and gave the captain's reply to the 
Wurttemberg hussar in German. When he had 
understood what was said to him, the German 
submitted and took his men elsewhere. The 
captain went out into the porch and gave some 
orders in a loud voice. 

When he returned to the room Pierre was 
sitting in the same place as before, with his 
head in his hands. His face expressed suffering. 
He really was suffering at that moment. When 
the captain went out and he was left alone, 
suddenly he came to himself and realized the po- 
sition he was in. It was not that Moscow had 
been taken or that the happy conquerors were 
masters in it and were patronizing him. Painful 
as that was it was not that which tormented 
Pierre at the moment. He was tormented by the 
consciousness of his own weakness. The few 
glasses of wine he had drunk and the conversa- 
tion with this good-natured man had destroyed 
the mood of concentrated gloom in which he 
had spent the last few days and which was es- 
sential for the execution of his design. The pis- 
tol, dagger, and peasant coat were ready. Napo- 
leon was to enter the town next day. Pierre still 
considered that it would be a useful and worthy 
action to slay the evildoer, but now he felt that 
he would not do it. He did not know why, but 
he felt a foreboding that he would not carry 
out his intention. He struggled against the con- 
fession of his weakness but dimly felt that he 
could not overcome it and that his former 
gloomy frame of mind, concerning vengeance, 
killing, and self-sacrifice, had been dispersed 
like dust by contact with the first man he 
met. 

The captain returned to the room, limping 
slightly and whistling a tune. 

The Frenchman's chatter which had previ- 
ously amused Pierre now repelled him. The 
tune he was whistling, his gait, and the gesture 



BOOK ELEVEN 519 

with which he twirled his mustache, all now 
seemed offensive. "I will go away immediately. 
I won't say another word to him," thought 
Pierre. He thought this, but still sat in the 
same place. A strange feeling of weakness tied 
him to the spot; he wished to get up and go 
away, but could not do so. 

The captain, on the other hand, seemed 
very cheerful. He paced up and down the room 
twice. His eyes shone and his mustache twitched 
as if he were smiling to himself at some amus- 
ing thought. 

"The colonel of those Wurttembergers is de- 
lightful," he suddenly said. "He's a German, 
but a nice fellow all the same. . . . But he's a 
German." He sat down facing Pierre. "By the 
way, you know German, then?" 

Pierre looked at him in silence. 

"What is the German for 'shelter'?" 

"Shelter?" Pierre repeated. "The German 
for shelter is Unterkunjt." 

"How do you say it?" the captain asked 
quickly and doubtfully. 

"Unterkunft," Pierre repeated. 

"Onterkoff," said the captain and looked at 
Pierre for some seconds with laughing eyes. 
"These Germans are first-rate fools, don't you 
think so, Monsieur Pierre?" he concluded. 

"Well, let's have another bottle of this Mos- 
cow Bordeaux, shall we? Morel will warm us 
up another little bottle. Morel!" he called out 
gaily. 

Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine. 
The captain looked at Pierre by the candle- 
light and was evidently struck by the troubled 
expression on his companion's face. Ramballe, 
with genuine distress and sympathy in his face, 
went up to Pierre and bent over him. 

"There now, we're sad," said he, touching 
Pierre's hand. "Have I upset you? No, really, 
have you anything against me?" he asked 
Pierre. "Perhaps it's the state of affairs?" 

Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially 
into the Frenchman's eyes whose expression of 
sympathy was pleasing to him. 

"Honestly, without speaking of what I owe 
you, I feel friendship for you. Can I do any- 
thing for you? Dispose of me. It is for life and 
death. I say it with my hand on my heart!" said 
he, striking his chest. 

"Thank you," said Pierre. 

The captain gazed intently at him as he 
had done when he learned that "shelter" was 
Unterkunft in German, and his face suddenly 
brightened. 

"Well, in that case, I drink to our friend- 



5*0 



WAR AND PEACE 



ship!" he cried gaily, filling two glasses with 
wine. 

Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it. 
Ramballe emptied his too, again pressed 
Pierre's hand, and leaned his elbows on the 
table in a pensive attitude. 

"Yes, my dear friend," he began, "such is 
fortune's caprice. Who would have said that I 
should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons 
in the service of Bonaparte, as we used to call 
him? Yet here I am in Moscow with him. I 
must tell you, mon cher" he continued in the 
sad and measured tones of a man who intends 
to tell a long story, "that our name is one of 
the most ancient in France." 

And with a Frenchman's easy and naive 
frankness the captain told Pierre the story of 
his ancestors, his childhood, youth, and man- 
hood, and all about his relations and his finan- 
cial and family affairs, "ma pauvre mtre" play- 
ing of course an important part in the story. 

"But all that is only life's setting, the real 
thing is love love! Am I not right, Monsieur 
Pierre?" said he, growing animated. "Another 
glass?" 

Pierre again emptied his glass and poured 
himself out a third. 

"Oh, women, women!" and the captain, 
looking with glistening eyes at Pierre, began 
talking of love and of his love affairs. 

There were very many of these, as one could 
easily believe, looking at the officer's hand- 
some, self-satisfied face, and noting the eager 
enthusiasm with which he spoke of women. 
Though all Ramballe's love stories had the 
sensual character which Frenchmen regard as 
the special charm and poetry of love, yet he 
told his story with such sincere conviction that 
he alone had experienced and known all the 
charm of love and he described women so al- 
luringly that Pierre listened to him with curi- 
osity. 

It was plain that I' amour which the French- 
man was so fond of was not that low and simple 
kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, nor 
was it the romantic love stimulated by himself 
that he experienced for Natasha. (Ramballe de- 
spised both these kinds of love equally: the one 
he considered the "love of clodhoppers" and 
the other the "love of simpletons.") L 'amour 
which the Frenchman worshiped consisted 
principally in the unnaturalness of his relation 
to the woman and in a combination of incon- 
gruities giving the chief charm to the feeling. 

Thus the captain touchingly recounted the 
story of his love for a fascinating marquise of 



thirty-five and at the same time for a charm- 
ing, innocent child of seventeen, daughter of 
the bewitching marquise. The conflict of mag- 
nanimity between the mother and the daugh- 
ter, ending in the mother's sacrificing herself 
and offering her daughter in marriage to her 
lover, even now agitated the captain, though it 
was the memory of a distant past. Then he re- 
counted an episode in which the husband 
played the part of the lover, and he the lover 
assumed the role of the husband, as well as 
several droll incidents from his recollections of 
Germany, where "shelter" is called Unterkunft, 
and where the husbands eat sauerkraut and the 
young girls are "too blonde." 

Finally, the latest episode in Poland still 
fresh in the captain's memory, and which he 
narrated with rapid gestures and glowing face, 
was of how he had saved the life of a Pole (in 
general, the saving of life continually occurred 
in the captain's stories) and the Pole had en- 
trusted to him his enchanting wife (parisienne 
de cceur) while himself entering the French 
service. The captain was happy, the enchant- 
ing Polish lady wished to elope with him, but, 
prompted by magnanimity, the captain re- 
stored the wife to the husband, saying as he did 
so: "I have saved your life, and I save your 
honor!" Having repeated these words the cap- 
tain wiped his eyes and gave himself a shake, 
as if driving away the weakness which assailed 
him at this touching recollection. 

Listening to the captain's tales, Pierre as 
often happens late in the evening and under 
the influence of wine followed all that was 
told him, understood it all, and at the same 
time followed a train of personal memories 
which, he knew not why, suddenly arose in his 
mind. While listening to these love stories his 
own love for Natasha unexpectedly rose to his 
mind, and going over the pictures of that love 
in his imagination he mentally compared 
them with Ramballe's tales. Listening to the 
story of the struggle between love and duty, 
Pierre saw before his eyes every minutest de- 
tail of his last meeting with the object of his 
love at the Sukharev water tower. At the time 
of that meeting it had not produced an effect 
upon him he had not even once recalled it. But 
now itseemed to him that that meeting had had 
in it something very important and poetic. 

"Peter Kirflovich, come herel We have rec- 
ognized you," he now seemed to hear the words 
she had uttered and to see before him her 
eyes, her smile, her traveling hood, and a stray 
lock of her hair . . . and there seemed to him 



BOOK ELEVEN 



something pathetic and touching in all this. 

Having finished his tale about the enchant- 
ing Polish lady, the captain asked Pierre if 
he had ever experienced a similar impulse to 
sacrifice himself for love and a feeling of envy 
of the legitimate husband. 

Challenged by this question Pierre raised his 
head and felt a need to express the thoughts 
that filled his mind. He began to explain that 
he understood love for a women somewhat 
differently. He said that in all his life he had 
loved and still loved only one woman, and that 
she could never be his. 

"Tiens!" said the captain. 

Pierre then explained that he had loved this 
woman from his earliest years, but that he had 
not dared to think of her because she was too 
young, and because he had been an illegitimate 
son without a name. Afterwards when he had 
received a name and wealth he dared not think 
of her because he loved her too well, placing 
her far above everything in the world, and es- 
pecially therefore above himself. 

When he had reached this point, Pierre asked 
the captain whether he understood that. 

The captain made a gesture signifying that 
even if he did not understand it he begged 
Pierre to continue. 

"Platonic love, clouds . . ." he muttered. 

Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or 
an impulse of frankness, or the thought that 
this man did not, and never would, know any 
of those who played a part in his story, or 
whether it was all these things together, some- 
thing loosened Pierre's tongue. Speaking thick- 
ly and with a faraway look in his shining eyes, 
he told the whole story of his life: his marriage, 
Natasha's love for his best friend, her betrayal 
of him, and all his own simple relations with 
her. Urged on oy Ramballe's questions he also 
told what he had at first concealed his own po- 
sition and even his name. 

More than anything else in Pierre's story the 
captain was impressed by the fact that Pierre 
was very rich, had two mansions in Moscow, 
and that he had abandoned everything and 
not left the city, but remained there conceal- 
ing his name and station. 

When it was late at night they went out to- 
gether into the street. The night was warm and 
light. To the left of the house on the Pokr6vka 
a fire glowed the first of those that were be- 
ginning in Moscow. To the right and high up 
in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon 
and opposite to it hung that bright comet 
which was connected in Pierre's heart with his 



love. At the gate stood Gerdsim, the cook, and 
two Frenchmen. Their laughter and their mu- 
tually incomprehensible remarks in two lan- 
guages could be heard. They were looking at 
the glow seen in the town. 

There was nothing terrible in the one small, 
distant fire in the immense city. 

Gazing at the high starry sky, at the moon, 
at the comet, and at the glow from the fire, 
Pierre experienced a joyful emotion. "There 
now, how good it is, what more does one need?" 
thought he. And suddenly remembering his 
intention he grew dizzy and felt so faint that 
he leaned against the fence to save himself 
from falling. 

Without taking leave of his new friend. 
Pierre left the gate with unsteady steps and re- 
turning to his room lay down on the sofa and 
immediately fell asleep. 

CHAPTER XXX 

THE GLOW of the first fire that began on the 
second of September was watched from the 
various roads by the fugitive Muscovites and 
by the retreating troops, with many different 
feelings. 

The Rostov party spent the night at Mytish- 
chi, fourteen miles from Moscow. They had 
started so late on the first of September, the 
road had been so blocked by vehicles a nd troops, 
so many things had been forgotten for which 
servants were sent back, that they had decided 
to spend that night at a place three miles out 
of Moscow. The next morning they woke late 
and were again delayed so often that they only 
got as far as Great Mytfshchi. At ten o'clock 
that evening the Rost6v family and the wound- 
ed traveling with them were all distributed in 
the yards and huts of that large village. The 
Rostovs' servants and coachmen and the or- 
derlies of the wounded officers, after attending 
to their masters, had supper, fed the horses, 
and came out into the porches. 

In a neighboring hut lay Rac" vski's adjutant 
with a fractured wrist. The awful pain he suf- 
fered made him moan incessantly and piteous- 
ly, and his moaning sounded terrible in the 
darkness of the autumn night. He had spent 
the first night in the same yard as the Rostovs. 
The countess said she had been unable to close 
her eyes on account of his moaning, and at 
Mystfshchi she moved into a worse hut simply 
to be farther away from the wounded man. 

In the darkness of the night one of the serv- 
ants noticed, above the high body of a coach 
standing before the porch, the small glow of 



5** 



WAR AND PEACE 



another fire. One glow had long been visible 
and everybody knew that it was Little Mytish- 
chi burning set on fire by Mam6nov's Cos- 
sacks. 

"But look here, brothers, there's another 
fire!" remarked an orderly. 

All turned their attention to the glow. 

"But they told us Little Mytishchi had been 
set on fire by Mam6nov's Cossacks." 

"But that's not Mytishchi, it's farther away." 

"Look, it must be in Moscow!" 

Two of the gazers went round to the other 
side of the coach and sat down on its steps. 

"It's more to the left, why, Little Mytishchi 
is over there, and this is right on the other 
side." 

Several men joined the first two. 

"See how it's flaring," said one. "That's a 
fire in Moscow: either in the Sushchvski or 
the Rog6zhski quarter." 

No one replied to this remark and for some 
time they all gazed silently at the spreading 
flames of the second fire in the distance. 

Old Daniel Ter^ntich, the count's valet (as 
he was called), came up to the group and shout- 
ed at Mishka. 

"What are you staring at, you good-for-noth- 
ing? . . . The count will be calling and there's 
nobody there; go and gather the clothes to- 
gether." 

"I only ran out to get some water," said 
Mishka. 

"But what do you think, Daniel Ter^ntich? 
Doesn't it look as if that glow were in Mos- 
cow?" remarked one of the footmen. 

Daniel Ter^ntich made no reply, and again 
for a long time they were all silent. The glow 
spread, rising and falling, farther and farther 
still. 

"God have mercy. . . . It's windy and dry 
. . ." said another voice. 

"Just look! See what it's doing now. O Lord! 
You can even see the crows flying. Lord have 
mercy on us sinners!" 

"They'll put it out, no fear!" 

"Who's to put it out?" Daniel Ter^ntich, 
who had hitherto been silent, was heard to say. 
His voice was calm and deliberate. "Moscow it 
is, brothers," said he. "Mother Moscow, the 
white . . ." his voice faltered, and he gave way 
to an old man's sob. 

And it was as if they had all only waited for 
this to realize the significance for them of the 
glow they were watching. Sighs were heard, 
words of prayer, and the sobbing of the count's 
old valet. 



CHAPTER XXXI 

THE VALET, returning to the cottage, informed 
the count that Moscow was burning. The count 
donned his dressing gown and went out to 
look. S6nya and Madame Schoss, who had not 
yet undressed, went out with him. Only Nata- 
sha and the countess remained in the room. 
Ptya was no longer with the family, he had 
gone on with his regiment which was making 
for Tr6itsa. 

The countess, on hearing that Moscow was 
on fire, began to cry. Natdsha, pale, with a 
fixed look, was sitting on the bench under the 
icons just where she had sat down on arriving 
and paid no attention to her father's words. 
She was listening to the ceaseless moaning of 
the adjutant, three houses off. 

"Oh, how terrible," said S6nya, returning 
from the yard chilled and frightened. "I be- 
lieve the whole of Moscow will burn, there's an 
awful glow! Natdsha, do look! You can see it 
from the window," she said to her cousin, evi- 
dently wishing to distract her mind. 

But Natdsha looked at her as if not under- 
standing what was said to her and again fixed 
her eyes on the corner of the stove. She had 
been in this condition of stupor since the morn- 
ing, when S6nya, to the surprise and annoy- 
ance of the countess, had for some unaccount- 
able reason found it necessary to tell Natdsha 
of Prince Andrew's wound and of his being 
with their party. The countess had seldom 
been so angry with anyone as she was with 
S6nya. S6nya had cried and begged to be for- 
given and now, as if trying to atone for her 
fault, paid unceasing attention to her cousin. 

"Look, Natdsha, how dreadfully it is burn- 
ing! "said she. 

"What's burning?" asked Natdsha. "Oh, yes, 
Moscow." 

And as if in order not to offend S6nya and 
to get rid of her, she turned her face to the 
window, looked out in such a way that it was 
evident that she could not see anything, and 
again settled down in her former attitude. 

"But you didn't see it!" 

"Yes, really I did," Natdsha replied in a 
voice that pleaded to be left in peace. 

Both the countess and S6nya understood 
that, naturally, neither Moscow nor the burn- 
ing of Moscow nor anything else could seem of 
importance to Natdsha. 

The count returned and lay down behind 
the partition. The countess went up to her 
daughter and touched her head with the back 
of her hand as she was wont to do when Natd- 



BOOK ELEVEN 



5*3 



sha was ill, then touched her forehead with her 
lips as if to feel whether she was feverish, and 
finally kissed her. 

"You are cold. You are trembling all over. 
You'd better lie down," said the countess. 

"Lie down? All right, I will. I'll lie down at 
once," said Natasha. 

When Natdsha had been told that morning 
that Prince Andrew was seriously wounded 
and was traveling with their party, she had at 
first asked many questions: Where was he go- 
ing? How was he wounded? Was it serious? And 
could she see him? But after she had been told 
that she could not see him, that he was serious- 
ly wounded but that his life was not in danger, 
she ceased to ask questions or to speak at all, 
evidently disbelieving what they told her, and 
convinced that say what she might she would 
still be told the same. All the way she had sat 
motionless in a corner of the coach with wide- 
open eyes, and the expression in them which 
the countess knew so well and feared so much, 
and now she sat in the same way on the bench 
where she had seated herself on arriving. She 
was planning something and either deciding 
or had already decided something in her mind. 
The countess knew this, but what it might be 
she did not know, and this alarmed and tor- 
mented her. 

"Natdsha, undress, darling; lie down on my 
bed." 

A bed had been made on a bedstead for the 
countess only. Madame Schoss and the two girls 
were to sleep on some hay on the floor. 

"No, Mamma, I will lie down here on the 
floor," Natasha replied irritably and she went 
to the window and opened it. Through the 
open window the moans of the adjutant could 
be heard more distinctly. She put her head out 
into the damp night air, and the countess saw 
her slim neck shaking with sobs and throbbing 
against the window frame. Natdsha knew it 
was not Prince Andrew who was moaning. She 
knew Prince Andrew was in the same yard as 
themselves and in a part of the hut across the 
passage; but this dreadful incessant moaning 
made her sob. The countess exchanged a look 
with S6nya. 

"Lie down, darling; lie down, my pet," said 
the countess, softly touching Natasha's shoul- 
ders. "Come, lie down." 

"Oh, yes ... I'll lie down at once," said Na- 
tdsha, and began hurriedly undressing, tugging 
at the tapes of her petticoat. 

When she had thrown off her dress and put 
on a dressing jacket, she sat down with her 



foot under her on the bed that had been made 
up on the floor, jerked her thin and rather 
short plait of hair to the front, and began re- 
plaiting it. Her long, thin, practiced fingers 
rapidly unplaited, replaited, and tied up her 
plait. Her head moved from side to side from 
habit, but her eyes, feverishly wide, looked 
fixedly before her. When her toilet for the 
night was finished she sank gently onto the 
sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest 
the door. 

"Natdsha, you'd better lie in the middle," 
said S6nya. 

"I'll stay here," muttered Natdsha. "Do lie 
down," she added crossly, and buried her face 
in the pillow. 

The countess, Madame Schoss, and S6nya 
undressed hastily and lay down. The small 
lamp in front of the icons was the only light 
left in the room. But in the yard there was a 
light from the fire at Little Mytishchi a mile 
and a half away, and through the night came 
the noise of people shouting at a tavern Ma- 
m6nov's Cossacks had set up across the street, 
and the adjutant's unceasing moans could still 
be heard. 

For a long time Natdsha listened attentively 
to the sounds that reached her from inside and 
outside the room and did not move. First she 
heard her mother praying and sighing and the 
creaking of her bed under her, then Madame 
Schoss 1 familiar whistling snore and S6nya's 
gentle breathing. Then the countess called to 
Natdsha. Natdsha did not answer. 

"I think she's asleep, Mamma," said S6nya 
softly. 

After a short silence the countess spoke again 
but this time no one replied. 

Soon after that Natdsha heard her mother's 
even breathing. Natdsha did not move, though 
her little bare foot, thrust out from under the 
quilt, was growing cold on the bare floor. 

As if to celebrate a victory over everybody, 
a cricket chirped in a crack in the wall. A cock 
crowed far off and another replied near by. 
The shouting in the tavern had died down; 
only the moaning of the adjutant was heard. 
Natdsha sat up. 

"S6nya, are you asleep? Mamma?" she whis- 
pered. 

No one replied. Natdsha rose slowly and care- 
fully, crossed herself, and stepped cautiously 
on the cold and dirty floor with her slim, sup- 
ple, bare feet. The boards of the floor creaked. 
Stepping cautiously from one foot to the other 
she ran like a kitten the few steps to the door 



WAR AND PEACE 



and grasped the cold door handle. 

It seemed to her that something heavy was 
beating rhythmically against all the walls of 
the room: it was her own heart, sinking with 
alarm and terror and overflowing with love. 

She opened the door and stepped across the 
threshold and onto the cold, damp earthen 
floor of the passage. The cold she felt refreshed 
her. With her bare feet she touched a sleeping 
man, stepped over him, and opened the door 
into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew 
lay. It was dark in there. In the farthest corner, 
on a bench beside a bed on which something 
was lying, stood a tallow candle with a long, 
thick, and smoldering wick. 

From the moment she had been told that 
morning of Prince Andrew's wound and his 
presence there, Natasha had resolved to see 
him. She did not know why she had to, she 
knew the meeting would be painful, but felt 
the more convinced that it was necessary. 

All day she had lived only in hope of seeing 
him that night. But now that the moment had 
come she was filled with dread of what she 
might see. How was he maimed? What was left 
of him? Was he like that incessant moaning of 
the adjutant's? Yes, he was altogether like that. 
In her imagination he was that terrible moan- 
ing personified. When she saw an indistinct 
shape in the corner, and mistook his knees 
raised under the quilt for his shoulders, she 
imagined a horrible body there, and stood still 
in terror. But an irresistible impulse drew her 
forward. She cautiously took one step and then 
another, and found herself in the middle of a 
small room containing baggage. Another man 
Tim6khin was lying in a corner on the 
benches beneath the icons, and two others 
the doctor and a valet lay on the floor. 

The valet sat up and whispered something. 
Tim6khin, kept awake by the pain in his 
wounded leg, gazed with wide-open eyes at this 
strange apparition of a girl in a white chemise, 
dressing jacket, and nightcap. The valet's 
sleepy, frightened exclamation, "What do you 
want? What's the matter?" made Natdsha ap- 
proach more swiftly to what was lying in the 
corner. Horribly unlike a man as that body 
looked, she must see him. She passed the valet, 
the snuff fell from the candle wick, and she saw 
Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside 
the quilt, and such as she had always seen him. 

He was the same as ever, but the feverish 
color of his face, his glittering eyes rapturously 
turned toward her, and especially his neck, 
delicate as a child's, revealed by the turn-down 



collar of his shirt, gave him a peculiarly inno- 
cent, childlike look, such as she had never seen 
on him before. She went up to him and with 
a swift, flexible, youthful movement dropped 
on her knees. 

He smiled and held out his hand to her. 

CHAPTER XXXII 

SEVEN DAYS had passed since Prince Andrew 
found himself in the ambulance station on the 
field of Borodin6. His feverish state and the 
inflammation of his bowels, which were in- 
jured, were in the doctor's opinion sure to 
carry him off. But on the seventh day he ate 
with pleasure a piece of bread with some tea, 
and the doctor noticed that his temperature 
was lower. He had regained consciousness that 
morning. The first night after they left Mos- 
cow had been fairly warm and he had remained 
in the caltche, but at Mytishchi the wounded 
man himself asked to be taken out and given 
some tea. The pain caused by his removal into 
the hut had made him groan aloud and again 
lose consciousness. When he had been placed 
on his camp bed he lay for a long time motion- 
less with closed eyes. Then he opened them 
and whispered softly: "And the tea?" His re- 
membering such a small detail of everyday life 
astonished the doctor. He felt Prince Andrew's 
pulse, and to his surprise and dissatisfaction 
found it had improved. He was dissatisfied be- 
cause he knew by experience that if his patient 
did not die now, he would do so a little later 
with greater suffering. Tim6khin, the red-nosed 
major of Prince Andrew's regiment, had joined 
him in Moscow and was being taken along 
with him, having been wounded in the leg at 
the battleofBorodin6. They were accompanied 
by a doctor, Prince Andrew's valet, his coach- 
man, and two orderlies. 

They gave Prince Andrew some tea. He 
drank it eagerly, looking with feverish eyes at 
the door in front of him as if trying to under- 
stand and remember something. 

"I don't want any more. Is Tim6khin here?" 
he asked. 

Tim6khin crept along the bench to him. 

"I am here, your excellency." 

"How's your wound?" 

"Mine, sir? All right. But how about you?" 

Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying 
to remember something. 

"Couldn't one get a book?" he asked. 

"What book?" 

"The Gospels. I haven't one." 

The doctor promised to procure it for him 



BOOK 

and began to ask how he was feeling. Prince 
Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly 
but reasonably, and then said he wanted a 
bolster placed under him as he was uncomfort- 
able and in great pain. The doctor and valet 
lifted the cloak with which he was covered and, 
making wry faces at the noisome smell of mor- 
tifying flesh that came from the wound, began 
examining that dreadful place. The doctor was 
very much displeased about something and 
made a change in the dressings, turning the 
wounded man over so that he groaned again 
and grew unconscious and delirious from the 
agony. He kept asking them to get him the 
book and put it under him. 

"What trouble would it be to you?" he said. 
"I have not got one. Please get it for me and 
put it under me for a moment," he pleaded in 
a piteous voice. 

The doctor went into the passage to wash his 
hands. 

"You fellows have no conscience," said he to 
the valet who was pouring water over his 
hands. "For just one moment I didn't look aft- 
er you ... It's such pain, you know, that I 
wonder how he can bear it." 

"By the Lord Jesus Christ, I thought we had 
put something under him!" said the valet. 

The first time Prince Andrew understood 
where he was and what was the matter with 
him and remembered being wounded and how 
was when he asked to be carried into the hut 
after his caliche had stopped at Mytishchi. Aft- 
er growing confused from pain while being 
carried into the hut he again regained con- 
sciousness, and while drinking tea once more 
recalled all that had happened to him, and 
above all vividly remembered the moment at 
the ambulance station when, at the sight of 
the sufferings of a man he disliked, those new 
thoughts had come to him which promised 
him happiness. And those thoughts, though 
now vague and indefinite, again possessed his 
soul. He remembered that he had now a new 
source of happiness and that this happiness 
had something to do with the Gospels. That 
was why he asked for a copy of them. The un- 
comfortable position in which they had put 
him and turned him over again confused his 
thoughts, and when he came to himself a third 
time it was in the complete stillness of the 
night. Everybody near him was sleeping. A 
cricket chirped from across the passage; some- 
one was shouting and singing in the street; 
cockroaches rustled on the table, on the icons, 
and on the walls, and a big fly flopped at the 



ELEVEN 525 

head of the bed and around the candle beside 
him, the wick of which was charred and had 
shaped itself like a mushroom. 

His mind was not in a normal state. A 
healthy man usually thinks of, feels, and re- 
members innumerable things simultaneously, 
but has the power and will to select one se- 
quence of thoughts or events on which to fix 
his whole attention. A healthy man can tear 
himself away from the deepest reflections to 
say a civil word to someone who comes in and 
can then return again to his own thoughts. 
But Prince Andrew's mind was not in a normal 
state in that respect. All the powers of his mind 
were more active and clearer than ever, but 
they acted apart from his will. Most diverse 
thoughts and images occupied him simultane- 
ously. At times his brain suddenly began to 
work with a vigor, clearness, and depth it had 
never reached when he was in health, but sud- 
denly in the midst of its work it would turn to 
some unexpected idea and he had not the 
strength to turn it back again. 

"Yes, a new happiness was revealed to me of 
which man cannot be deprived," he thought 
as he lay in the semi-darkness of the quiet hut, 
gazing fixedly before him with feverish, wide- 
open eyes. "A happiness lying beyond material 
forces, outside the material influences that act 
on mana happiness of the soul alone, the 
happiness of loving. Every man can under- 
stand it, but to conceive it and enjoin it was 
possible only for God. But how did God en- 
join that law? And why was the Son . . . ?" 

And suddenly the sequence of these thoughts 
broke off, and Prince Andrew heard (without 
knowing whether it was a delusion or reality) 
a soft whispering voice incessantly and rhyth- 
mically repeating "piti-piti-piti," and then "ti- 
ti," and then again "piti-piti-piti," and "ti-ti" 
once more. At the same time he felt that above 
his face, above the very middle of it, some 
strange airy structure was being erected out of 
slender needles or splinters, to the sound of 
this whispered music. He felt that he had to 
balance carefully (though it was difficult) so 
that this airy structure should not collapse; but 
nevertheless it kept collapsing and again slow- 
ly rising to the sound of whispered rhythmic 
music "it stretches, stretches, spreading out 
and stretching," said Prince Andrew to him- 
self. While listening to this whispering and 
feeling the sensation of this drawing out and 
the construction of this edifice of needles, he 
also saw by glimpses a red halo round the 
candle, and heard the rustle of the cockroaches 



526 



WAR AND PEACE 



and the buzzing of the fly that flopped against 
his pillow and his face. Each time the fly 
touched his face it gave him a burning sensa- 
tion and yet to his surprise it did not destroy 
the structure, though it knocked against the 
very region of his face where it was rising. But 
besides this there was something else of im- 
portance. It was something white by the door 
the statue of a sphinx, which also oppressed 
him. 

"But perhaps that's my shirt on the table," 
he thought, "and that's my legs, and that is 
the door, but why is it always stretching and 
drawing itself out, and 'piti-piti-piti' and 'ti-ti* 
and 'piti-piti-piti' . . . ? That's enough, please 
leave off!" Prince Andrew painfully entreated 
someone. And suddenly thoughts and feelings 
again swam to the surface of his mind with 
peculiar clearness and force. 

"Yes love," he thought again quite clearly. 
"But not love which loves for something, for 
some quality, for some purpose, or for some 
reason, but the love which I while dying- 
first experienced when I saw my enemy and yet 
loved him. I experienced that feeling of love 
which is the very essence of the soul and does 
not require an object. Now again I feel that 
bliss. To love one's neighbors, to love one's 
enemies, to love everything, to love God in 
all His manifestations. It is possible to love 
someone dear to you with human love, but an 
enemy can only be loved by divine love. That 
is why I experienced such joy when I felt that 
I loved that man. What has become of him? Is 
he alive? . . . 

"When loving with human love one may 
pass from love to hatred, but divine love can- 
not change. No, neither death nor anything 
else can destroy it. It is the very essence of the 
soul. Yet how many people have I hated in my 
life? And of them all, I loved and hated none 
as I did her." And he vividly pictured to him- 
self Natdsha, not as he had done in the past 
with nothing but her charms which gave him 
delight, but for the first time picturing to him- 
self her soul. And he understood her feelings, 
her sufferings, shame, and remorse. He now 
understood for the first time all the cruelty of 
his rejection of her, the cruelty of his rupture 
with her. "If only it were possible for me to see 
her once more! Just once, looking into those 
eyes to say . . ." 

"Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti 
boom!" flopped the fly. ... And his attention 
was suddenly carried into another world, a 
world of reality and delirium in which some- 



thing particular was happening. In that world 
some structure was still being erected and did 
not fall, something was still stretching out, and 
the candle with its red halo was still burning, 
and the same shir tl ike sphinx lay near the 
door; but besides all this something creaked, 
there was a whiff of fresh air, and a new white 
sphinx appeared, standing at the door. And 
that sphinx had the pale face and shining eyes 
of the very Natdsha of whom he had just been 
thinking. 

"Oh, how oppressive this continual delirium 
is," thought Prince Andrew, trying to drive 
that face from his imagination. But the face 
remained before him with the force of reality 
and drew nearer. Prince Andrew wished to re- 
turn to that former world of pure thought, but 
he could not, and delirium drew him back into 
its domain. The soft whispering voice con- 
tinued its rhythmic murmur, something op- 
pressed him and stretched out, and the strange 
face was before him. Prince Andrew collected 
all his strength in an effort to recover his senses, 
he moved a little, and suddenly there was a 
ringing in his ears, a dimness in his eyes, and 
like a man plunged into water he lost con- 
sciousness. When he came to himself, Natdsha, 
that same living Natdsha whom of all people 
he most longed to love wtih this new pure 
divine love that had been revealed to him, was 
kneeling before him. He realized that it was 
the real living Natdsha, and he was not sur- 
prised but quietly happy. Natdsha, motionless 
on her knees (she was unable to stir), with 
frightened eyes riveted on him, was restraining 
her sobs. Her face was pale and rigid. Only in 
the lower part of it something quivered. 

Prince Andrew sighed with relief, smiled, 
and held out his hand. 

"You?" he said. "How fortunatel" 

With a rapid but careful movement Natdsha 
drew nearer to him on her knees and, taking 
his hand carefully, bent her face over it and 
began kissing it, just touching it lightly with 
her lips. 

"Forgive me!" she whispered, raising her 
head and glancing at him. "Forgive me!" 

"I love you," said Prince Andrew. 

"Forgive ... I" 

"Forgive what?" he asked. 

"Forgive me for what I ha-ve do-ne!" fal- 
tered Natdsha in a scarcely audible, broken 
whisper, and began kissing his hand more 
rapidly, just touching it with her lips. 

"I love you more, better than before," said 
Prince Andrew, lifting her face with his hand 



BOOK ELEVEN 



527 



so as to look into her eyes. 

Those eyes, filled with happy tears, gazed at 
him timidly, compassionately, and with joyous 
love. Natasha's thin pale face, with its swollen 
lips, was more than plain it was dreadful. But 
Prince Andrew did not see that, he saw her 
shining eyes which were beautiful. They heard 
the sound of voices behind them. 

Peter the valet, who was now wide awake, 
had roused the doctor. Tim6khin, who had not 
slept at all because of the pain in his leg, had 
long been watching all that was going on, care- 
fully covering his bare body with the sheet as 
he huddled up on his bench. 

"What's this?" said the doctor, rising from 
his bed. "Please go away, madam!" 

At that moment a maid sent by the countess, 
who had noticed her daughter's absence, 
knocked at the door. 

Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep 
Natasha went out of the room and, returning 
to her hut, fell sobbing on her bed. 

From that time, during all the rest of the 
Rostovs' journey, at every halting place and 
wherever they spent a night, Natdsha never 
left the wounded Bolk6nski, and the doctor 
had to admit that he had not expected from a 
young girl either such firmness or such skill in 
nursing a wounded man. 

Dreadful as the countess imagined it would 
be should Prince Andrew die in her daughter's 
arms during the journey as, judging by what 
the doctor said, it seemed might easily happen 
she could not oppose Natasha. Though with 
the intimacy now established between the 
wounded man and Natasha the thought oc- 
curred that should he recover their former en- 
gagement would be renewed, no one least of 
all Natasha and Prince Andrew spoke of this: 
the unsettled question of life and death, which 
hung not only over Bolk6nski but over all 
Russia, shut out all other considerations. 

CHAPTER XXXIII 

ON THE THIRD OF SEPTEMBER Pierre awoke late. 
His head was aching, the clothes in which he 
had slept without undressing felt uncomfort- 
able on his body, and his mind had a dim con- 
sciousness of something shameful he had done 
the day before. That something shameful was 
his yesterday's conversation with Captain Ram- 
balle. 

It was eleven by the clock, but it seemed 
peculiarly dark out of doors. Pierre rose, 
rubbed his eyes, and seeing the pistol with an 



engraved stock which Gerasim had replaced 
on the writing table, he remembered where he 
was and what lay before him that very day. 

"Am I not too late?" he thought. "No, prob- 
ably he won't make his entry into Moscow be- 
fore noon." 

Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on 
what lay before him, but hastened to act. 

After arranging his clothes, he took the pis- 
tol and was about to go out. But it then oc- 
curred to him for the first time that he certain- 
ly could not carry the weapon in his hand 
through the streets. It was difficult to hide such 
a big pistol even under his wide coat. He could 
not carry it unnoticed in his belt or under his 
arm. Besides, it had been discharged, and he 
had not had time to reload it. "No matter, the 
dagger will do," he said to himself, though 
when planning his design he had more than 
once come to the conclusion that the chief 
mistake made by the student in 1809 had been 
to try to kill Napoleon with a dagger. But as 
his chief aim consisted not in carrying out his 
design, but in proving to himself that he would 
not abandon his intention and was doing all 
he could to achieve it, Pierre hastily took the 
blunt jagged dagger in a green sheath which 
he had bought at the Sukharev market with 
the pistol, and hid it under his waistcoat. 

Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled 
his cap low on his head, Pierre went down the 
corridor, trying to avoid making a noise or 
meeting the captain, and passed out into the 
street. 

The conflagration, at which he had looked 
with so much indifference the evening before, 
had greatly increased during the night. Mos- 
cow was on fire in several places. The build- 
ings in Carriage Row, across the river, in the 
Bazaar and the Povarsk6y, as well as the barges 
on the Moskva* River and the timber yards by 
the Dorogomflov Bridge, were all ablaze. 

Pierre's way led through side streets to the 
Povarskoy and from there to the church of St. 
Nicholas on the Arbat, where he had long be- 
fore decided that the deed should be done. The 
gates of most of the houses were locked and 
the shutters up. The streets and lanes were 
deserted. The air was full of smoke and the 
smell of burning. Now and then he met Rus- 
sians with anxious and timid faces, and French- 
men with an air not of the city but of the 
camp, walking in the middle of the streets. 
Both the Russians and the French looked at 
Pierre with surprise. Besides his height and 
stoutness, and the strange morose look of suf- 



5*8 

fering in his face and whole figure, the Rus- 
sians stared at him because they could not make 
out to what class he could belong. The French 
followed him with astonishment in their eyes 
chiefly because Pierre, unlike all the other Rus- 
sians who gazed at the French with fear and 
curiosity, paid no attention to them. At the 
gate of one house three Frenchmen, who were 
explaining something to some Russians who 
did not understand them, stopped Pierre ask- 
ing if he did not know French. 

Pierre shook his head and went on. In an- 
other side street a sentinel standing beside a 
green caisson shouted at him, but only when 
the shout was threateningly repeated and he 
heard the click of the man's musket as he 
raised it did Pierre understand that he had to 
pass on the other side of the street. He heard 
nothing and saw nothing of what went on 
around him. He carried his resolution within 
himself in terror and haste, like something 
dreadful and alien to him, for, after the previ- 
ous night's experience, he was afraid of losing 
it. But he was not destined to bring his mood 
safely to his destination. And even had he not 
been hindered by anything on the way, his 
intention could not now have been carried out, 
for Napoleon had passed the Arbat more than 
four hours previously on his way from the Do- 
rogomflov suburb to the Kremlin, and was 
now sitting in a very gloomy frame of mind in 
a royal study in the Kremlin, giving detailed 
and exact orders as to measures to be taken im- 
mediately to extinguish the fire, to prevent 
looting, and to reassure the inhabitants. But 
Pierre did not know this; he was entirely ab- 
sorbed in what lay before him, and was tor- 
turedas those are who obstinately undertake 
a task that is impossible for them not because 
of its difficulty but because of its incompati- 
bility with their natures by the fear of weaken- 
ing at the decisive moment and so losing his 
self-esteem. 

Though he heard and saw nothing around 
him he found his way by instinct and did not 
go wrong in the side streets that led to the 
Povarsk6y. 

As Pierre approached that street the smoke 
became denser and denser he even felt the 
heat of the fire. Occasionally curly tongues of 
flame rose from under the roofs of the houses. 
He met more people in the streets and they 
were more excited. But Pierre, though he felt 
that something unusual was happening around 
him, did not realize that he was approaching 
the fire. As he was going along a footpath across 



WAR AND PEACE 



a wide-open space adjoining the Povarsk6y on 
one side and the gardens of Prince Gruzfnski's 
house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard the 
desperate weeping of a woman close to him. 
He stopped as if awakening from a dream and 
lifted his head. 

By the side of the path, on the dusty dry 
grass, all sorts of household goods lay in a 
heap : feather beds, a samovar, icons, and trunks. 
On the ground, beside the trunks, sat a thin 
woman no longer young, with long, prominent 
upper teeth, and wearing a black cloak and 
cap. This woman, swaying to and fro and mut- 
tering something, was choking with sobs. Two 
girls of about ten and twelve, dressed in dirty 
short frocks and cloaks, were staring at their 
mother with a look of stupefaction on their 
pale frightened faces. The youngest child, a 
boy of about seven, who wore an overcoat and 
an immense cap evidently not his own, was 
crying in his old nurse's arms. A dirty, bare- 
footed maid was sitting on a trunk, and, hav- 
ing undone her pale-colored plait, was pulling 
it straight and sniffing at her singed hair. The 
woman's husband, a short, round-shouldered 
man in the undress uniform of a civilian of- 
ficial, with sausage-shaped whiskers and show- 
ing under his square-set cap the hair smoothly 
brushed forward over his temples, with ex- 
pressionless face was moving the trunks, which 
were placed one on another, and was dragging 
some garments from under them. 

As soon as she saw Pierre, the woman almost 
threw herself at his feet. 

"Dear people, good Christians, save me, help 
me, dear friends . . . help us, somebody," she 
muttered between her sobs. "My girl . . . My 
daughter 1 My youngest daughter is left be- 
hind. She's burned! Ooh! Was it for this I 
nursed you. . . . Ooh!" 

"Don't, Mary Nikoldevna!" said her hus- 
band to her in a low voice, evidently only to 
justify himself before the stranger. "Sister must 
have taken her, or else where can she be?" he 
added. 

"Monster! Villain!" shouted the woman an- 
grily, suddenly ceasing to weep. "You have no 
heart, you don't feel for your own child! An- 
other man would have rescued her from the 
fire. But this is a monster and neither a man 
nor a father! You, honored sir, are a noble 
man," she went on, addressing Pierre rapidly 
between her sobs. "The fire broke out along- 
side, and blew our way, the maid called out 
Tire!' and we rushed to collect our things. We 
ran out just as we were. . . . This is what we 



BOOK ELEVEN 



529 



have brought away. . . . The icons, and my 
dowry bed, all the rest is lost. We seized the 
children. But not Katie! Oohl O Lord! . . ." 
and again she began to sob. "My child, my dear 
one! Burned, burned!" 

"But where was she left?" asked Pierre. 

From the expression of his animated face 
the woman saw that this man might help her. 

"Oh, dear sir!" she cried, seizing him by the 
legs. "My benefactor, set my heart at ease. . . . 
Anfska,go, you horrid girl, show him the way!" 
she cried to the maid, angrily opening her 
mouth and still farther exposing her long 
teeth. 

"Show me the way, show me, I ... I'll do it," 
gasped Pierre rapidly. 

The dirty maidservant stepped from behind 
the trunk, put up her plait, sighed, and went 
on her short, bare feet along the path. Pierre 
felt as if he had come back to life after a heavy 
swoon. He held his head higher, his eyes shone 
with the light of life, and with swift steps he 
followed the maid, overtook her, and came out 
on the Povarsk6y. The whole street was full of 
clouds of black smoke. Tongues of flame here 
and there broke through that cloud. A great 
number of people crowded in front of the con- 
flagration. In the middle of the street stood a 
French general saying something to those 
around him. Pierre, accompanied by the maid, 
was advancing to the spot where the general 
stood, but the French soldiers stopped him. 

"On ne passe pas!" * cried a voice. 

"This way, uncle," cried the girl. "We'll pass 
through the side street, by the Nikulins'I" 

Pierre turned back, giving a spring now and 
then to keep up with her. She ran across the 
street, turned down a side street to the left, 
and, passing three houses, turned into a yard 
on the right. 

"It's here, close by," said she and, running 
across the yard, opened a gate in a wooden 
fence and, stopping, pointed out to him a small 
wooden wing of the house, which was burning 
brightly and fiercely. One of its sides had fallen 
in, another was on fire, and bright flames issued 
from the openings of the windows and from 
under the roof. 

As Pierre passed through the fence gate, he 
was enveloped by hot air and involuntarily 
stopped. 

"Which is it? Which is your house?" he 
asked. 

"Ooh!" wailed the girl, pointing to the wing. 
"That's it, that was our lodging. You've burned 

10 You can't pass!" 



to death, our treasure, Katie, my precious little 
missy! Ooh!" lamented Aniska, who at the 
sight of the fire felt that she too must give ex- 
pression to her feelings. 

Pierre rushed to the wing, but the heat was 
so great that he involuntarily passed round in 
a curve and came upon the large house that 
was as yet burning only at one end, just below 
the roof, and around which swarmed a crowd 
of Frenchmen. At first Pierre did not realize 
what these men, who were dragging something 
out, were about; but seeing before him a 
Frenchman hitting a peasant with a blunt sa- 
ber and trying to take from him a fox-fur coat, 
he vaguely understood that looting was going 
on there, but he had no time to dwell on that 
idea. 

The sounds of crackling and the din of fall- 
ing walls and ceilings, the whistle and hiss of 
the flames, the excited shouts of the people, 
and the sight of the swayingsmoke, now gather- 
ing into thick black clouds and now soaring 
up with glittering sparks, with here and there 
dense sheaves of flame (now red and now like 
golden fish scales creeping along the walls), 
and the heat and smoke and rapidity of mo- 
tion, produced on Pierre the usual animating 
effects of a conflagration. It had a peculiarly 
strong effect on him because at the sight of the 
fire he felt himself suddenly freed from the 
ideas that had weighed him down. He felt 
young, bright, adroit, and resolute. He ran 
round to the other side of the lodge and was 
about to dash into that part of it which was 
still standing, when just above his head he 
heard several voices shouting and then a crack- 
ing sound and the ring of something heavy 
falling close beside him. 

Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the 
large house some Frenchmen who had just 
thrown out the drawer of a chest, filled with 
metal articles. Other French soldiers standing 
below went up to the drawer. 

"What does this fellow want?" shouted one 
of them referring to Pierre. 

"There's a child in that house. Haven't you 
seen a child?" cried Pierre. 

"What's he talking about? Get along!" said 
several voices, and one of the soldiers, evident- 
ly afraid that Pierre might want to take from 
them some of the plate and bronzes that were 
in the drawer, moved threateningly toward 
him. 

"A child?" shouted a Frenchman fromabove. 
"I did hear something squealing in the garden. 
Perhaps it's his brat that the fellow is look- 



53 

ing for. After all, one must be human, you 

know. . . ." 

"Where is it? Where?" said Pierre. 

"There! There!" shouted the Frenchman at 
the window, pointing to the garden at the back 
of the house. "Wait a bit I'm coming down." 

And a minute or two later the Frenchman, a 
black-eyed fellow with a spot on his cheek, in 
shirt sleeves, really did jump out of a window 
on the ground floor, and clapping Pierre on 
the shoulder ran with him into the garden. 

"Hurry up, you others!" he called out to his 
comrades. "It's getting hot." 

When they reached a gravel path behind 
the house the Frenchman pulled Pierre by the 
arm and pointed to a round, graveled space 
where a three-year-old girl in a pink dress was 
lying under a seat. 

"There is your child! Oh, a girl, so much the 
better!" said the Frenchman. "Good-by, Fatty. 
We must be human, we are all mortal you 
know!" and the Frenchman with the spot on 
his cheek ran back to his comrades. 

Breathless with joy, Pierre ran to the little 
girl and was going to take her in his arms. But 
seeing a stranger the sickly, scrofulous-looking 
child, unattractively like her mother, began to 
yell and run away. Pierre, however, seized her 
and lifted her in his arms. She screamed des- 
perately and angrily and tried with her little 
hands to pull Pierre's hands away and to bite 
them with her slobbering mouth. Pierre was 
seized by a sense of horror and repulsion such 
as he had experienced when touching some 
nasty little animal. But he made an effort not 
to throw the child down and ran with her to 
the large house. It was now, however, impossi- 
ble to get back the way he had come; the maid, 
Anfska, was no longer there, and Pierre with a 
feeling of pity and disgust pressed the wet, 
painfully sobbing child to himself as tenderly 
as he could and ran with her through the gar- 
den seeking another way out. 

CHAPTER XXXIV 

HAVING RUN through different yards and side 
streets, Pierre got back with his little burden 
to the Gruzfnski garden at the corner of the 
Povarsk6y. He did not at first recognize the 
place from which he had set out to look for the 
child, so crowded was it now with people and 
goods that had been dragged out of the houses. 
Besides Russian families who had taken refuge 
here from the fire with their belongings, there 
were several French soldiers in a variety of 
clothing. Pierre took no notice of them. He 



WAR AND PEACE 

hurried to find the family of that civil servant 
in order to restore the daughter to her mother 
and go to save someone else. Pierre felt that he 
had still much to do and to do quickly. Glow- 
ing with the heat and from running, he felt at 
that moment more strongly than ever the sense 
of youth, animation, and determination that 
had come on him when he ran to save the 
child. She had now become quiet and, clinging 
with her little hands to Pierre's coat, sat on his 
arm gazing about her like some little wild ani- 
mal. He glanced at her occasionally with a 
slight smile. He fancied he saw something 
pathetically innocent in that frightened, sickly 
little face. 

He did not find the civil servant or his wife 
where he had left them. He walked among the 
crowd with rapid steps, scanning the various 
faces he met. Involuntarily he noticed a Geor- 
gian or Armenian family consisting of a very 
handsome old man of Oriental type, wearing 
a new, cloth-covered, sheepskin coat and new 
boots, an old woman of similar type, and a 
young woman. That very young woman seemed 
to Pierre the perfection of Oriental beauty, 
with her sharply outlined, arched, black eye- 
brows and the extraordinarily soft, bright col- 
or of her long, beautiful, expressionless face. 
Amid the scattered property and the crowd on 
the open space, she, in her rich satin cloak 
with a bright lilac shawl on her head, suggested 
a delicate exotic plant thrown out onto the 
snow. She was sitting on some bundles a little 
behind the old woman, and looked from un- 
der her long lashes with motionless, large, al- 
mond-shaped eyes at the ground before her. 
Evidently she was aware of her beauty and 
fearful because of it. Her face struck Pierre 
and, hurrying along by the fence, he turned 
several times to look at her. When he had 
reached the fence, still without finding those 
he sought, he stopped and looked about him. 

With the child in his arms his figure was now 
more conspicuous than before, and a group of 
Russians, both men and women, gathered 
about him. 

"Have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? 
You're of the gentry yourself, aren't you? 
Whose child is it?" they asked him. 

Pierre replied that the child belonged to a 
woman in a black coat who had been sitting 
there with her other children, and he asked 
whether anyone knew where she had gone. 

"Why, that must be the Anferovs," said an 
old deacon, addressing a pockmarked peasant 
woman. "Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy!" 



he added in his customary bass. 

"The Anfrovs?No," said the woman. "They 
left in the morning. That must be either Mary 
Nikoldevna's or the Ivanovs'l" 

"He says 'a woman/ and Mary Nikoldevna 
is a lady," remarked a house serf. 

"Do you know her? She's thin, with long 
teeth," said Pierre. 

"That's Mary Nikoldevna! They went in- 
side the garden when these wolves swooped 
down," said the woman, pointing totheFrench 
soldiers. 

"O Lord, have mercy!" added the deacon. 

"Go over that way, they're there. It's shel 
She kept on lamenting and crying," continued 
the woman. "It's she. Here, this way!" 

But Pierre was not listening to the woman. 
He had for some seconds been intently watch- 
ing what was going on a few steps away. He 
was looking at the Armenian family and at 
two French soldiers who had gone up to them. 
One of these, a nimble little man, was wearing 
a blue coat tied round the waist with a rope. 
He had a nightcap on his head and his feet 
were bare. The other, whose appearance par- 
ticularly struck Pierre, was a long, lank, round- 
shouldered, fair-haired man, slow in his move- 
ments and with an idiotic expression of face. 
He wore a woman's loose gown of frieze, blue 
trousers, and large torn Hessian boots. The 
little barefooted Frenchman in the blue coat 
went up to the Armenians and, saying some- 
thing, immediately seized the old man by his 
legs and the old man at once began pulling off 
his boots. The other in the frieze gown stopped 
in front of the beautiful Armenian girl and 
with his hctnds in his pockets stood staring at 
her, motionless and silent. 

"Here, take the child!" said Pierre peremp- 
torily and hurriedly to the woman, handing 
the little girl to her. "Give her back to them, 
give her back!" he almost shouted, putting the 
child, who began screaming, on the ground, 
and again looking at the Frenchman and the 
Armenian family. 

The old man was already sitting barefoot. 
The little Frenchman had secured his second 
boot and was slapping one boot against the 
other. The old man was saying something in a 
voice broken by sobs, but Pierre caught but a 
glimpse of this, his whole attention was di- 
rected to the Frenchman in the frieze gown 
who meanwhile, swaying slowly from side to 
side, had drawn nearer to the young woman 
and taking his hands from his pockets had 
seized her by the neck. 



BOOK ELEVEN 531 

The beautiful Armenian still sat motionless 
and in the same attitude, with her long lashes 
drooping as if she did not see or feel what the 
soldier was doing to her. 

While Pierre was running the few steps that 
separated him from the Frenchman, the tall 
marauder in the frieze gown was already tear- 
ing from her neck the necklace the young 
Armenian was wearing, and the young wom- 
an, clutching at her neck, screamed pierc- 
ingly. 

"Let that woman alone!" exclaimed Pierre 
hoarsely in a furious voice, seizing the soldier 
by his round shoulders and throwing him 
aside. 

The soldier fell, got up, and ran away. But 
his comrade, throwing down the boots and 
drawing his sword, moved threateningly to- 
ward Pierre. 

"Voyons, pas de bStises!" * he cried. 

Pierre was in such a transport of rage that 
he remembered nothing and his strength in- 
creased tenfold. He rushed at the barefooted 
Frenchman and, before the latter had time to 
draw his sword, knocked him off his feet and 
hammered him with his fists. Shouts of ap- 
proval were heard from the crowd around, and 
at the same moment a mounted patrol of French 
Uhlans appeared from round the corner. The 
Uhlans came up at a trot to Pierre and the 
Frenchman and surrounded them. Pierre re- 
membered nothing of what happened after 
that. He only remembered beating someone 
and being beaten and finally feeling that his 
hands were bound and that a crowd of French 
soldters stood around him and were searching 
him. 

"Lieutenant, he has a dagger," were the 
first words Pierre understood. 

"Ah, a weapon?" said the officer and turned 
to the barefooted soldier who had been ar- 
rested with Pierre. "All right, you can tell all 
about it at the court-martial." Then he turned 
to Pierre. "Do you speak French?" 

Pierre looked around him with bloodshot 
eyes and did not reply. His face probably looked 
very terrible, for the officer said something in 
a whisper and four more Uhlans left the 
ranks and placed themselves on both sides of 
Pierre. 

"Do you speak French?" the officer asked 
again, keeping at a distance from Pierre. "Call 
the interpreter." 

A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode 
out from the ranks, and by his clothes and 

1 "Look here, no nonsense!" 



532 WAR AND PEACE 

manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him 
to be a French salesman from one of the Mos- 
cow shops. 

"He does not look like a common man/' said 
the interpreter, after a searching look at Pierre. 

"Ah, he looks very much like an incendiary," 
remarked the officer. "And ask him who he is," 
he added. 

"Who are you?" asked the interpreter in 
poor Russian. "You must answer the chief." 

"I will not tell you who I am. I am your 
prisoner take me!" Pierre suddenly replied in 
French. 

"Ah, ah!" muttered the officer with a frown. 
"Well then, march!" 

A crowd had collected round the Uhlans. 
Nearest to Pierre stood the pockmarked peas- 
ant woman with the little girl, and when the 
patrol started she moved forward. 

"Where are they taking you to, you poor 
dear?" said she. "And the little girl, the little 
girl, what am I to do with her if she's not 
theirs?" said the woman. 

"What does that woman want?" asked the 
officer. 

Pierre was as if intoxicated. His elation in- 



creased at the sight of the little girl he had 
saved. 

"What does she want?" he murmured. "She 
is bringing me my daughter whom I have just 
saved from the flames," said he. "Good-by!" 
And without knowing how this aimless lie had 
escaped him, he went along with resolute and 
triumphant steps between the French soldiers. 

The French patrol was one of those sent out 
through the various streets of Moscow by Du- 
rosnel's order to put a stop to the pillage, and 
especially to catch the incendiaries who, ac- 
cording to the general opinion which had 
that day originated among the higher French 
officers, were the cause of the conflagrations. 
After marching through a number of streets the 
patrol arrested five more Russian suspects: a 
small shopkeeper, two seminary students, a 
peasant, and a house serf, besides several 
looters. But of all these various suspected 
characters, Pierre was considered to be the 
most suspicious of all. When they had all 
been brought for the night to a large house 
on the Zubov Rampart that was being used as 
a guardhouse, Pierre was placed apart under 
strict guard. 



Book Twelve: 1812 



CHAPTER I 

IN PETERSBURG at that time a complicated 
struggle was being carried on with greater heat 
than ever in the highest circles, between the 
parties of Rumyantsev, the French, Marya Fe- 
dorovna, the Tsarvich, and others, drowned 
as usual by the buzzing of the court drones. But 
the calm, luxurious life of Petersburg, con- 
cerned only about phantoms and reflections 
of real life, went on in its old way and made it 
hard, except by a great effort, to realize the 
danger and the difficult position of the Rus- 
sian people. There were the same receptions 
and balls, the same French theater, the same 
court interests and service interests and in- 
trigues as usual. Only in the very highest cir- 
cles were attempts made to keep in mind the 
difficulties of the actual position. Stories were 
whispered of how differently the two Empresses 
behaved in these difficult circumstances. The 
Empress Marya, concerned for the welfare of 
the charitable and educational institutions un- 
der her patronage, had given directions that 
they should all be removed to Kazdn, and the 
things belonging to these institutions had al- 
ready been packed up. The Empress Elisabeth, 
however, when asked what instructions she 
would be pleased to give with her characteris- 
tic Russian patriotism had replied that she 
could give no directions about state institu- 
tions for that was the affair of the sovereign, 
but as far as she personally was concerned she 
would be the last to quit Petersburg. 

At Anna Pavlovna's on the twenty-sixth of 
August, the very day of the battle of Borodin6, 
there was a soiree, the chief feature of which 
was to be the reading of a letter from His Lord- 
ship the Bishop when sending the Emperor 
an icon of the Venerable Sergius. It was re- 
garded af a model of ecclesiastical, patriotic 
eloquence. Prince Vasili himself, famed for his 
elocution, was to read it. (He used to read at 
the Empress'.) The art of his reading was sup- 
posed to lie in rolling out the words, quite in- 
dependently of their meaning, in a loud and 



singsong voice alternating between a despair- 
ing wail and a tender murmur, so that the 
wail fell quite at random on one word and the 
murmur on another. This reading, as was al- 
ways the case at Anna Pavlovna's soirees, had 
a political significance. That evening she ex- 
pected several important personages who had 
to be made ashamed of their visits to the French 
theater and aroused to a patriotic temper. A 
good many people had already arrived, but 
Anna Pavlovna, not yet seeing all those whom 
she wanted in her drawing room, did not let 
the reading begin but wound up the springs of 
a general conversation. 

The news of the day in Petersburg was the 
illness of Countess Bezukhova. She had fallen 
ill unexpectedly a few days previously, had 
missed several gatherings of which she was 
usually the ornament, and was said to be receiv- 
ing no one, and instead of the celebrated Pe- 
tersburg doctors who usually attended her had 
entrusted herself to some Italian doctor who 
was treating her in some new and unusual 
way. 

They all knew very well that the enchanting 
countess' illness arose from an inconvenience 
resulting from marrying two husbands at the 
same time, and that the Italian's cure consist- 
ed in removing such inconvenience; but in 
Anna Pavlovna's presence no one dared to 
think of this or even appear to know it. 

"They say the poor countess is very ill. The 
doctor says it is angina pectoris." 

"Angina? Oh, that's a terrible illness!" 

"They say that the rivals are reconciled, 
thanks to the angina . . ." and the word angina 
was repeated with great satisfaction. 

"The old count is pathetic, they say. He cried 
like a child when the doctor told him the case 
was dangerous." 

"Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an en- 
chanting woman." 

"You are speaking of the poor countess?" 
said Anna Pavlovna, coming up just then. "I 
sent to ask for news, and hear that she is a lit- 



534 



WAR AND PEACE 



tie better. Oh, she is certainly the most charm- 
ing woman in the world," she went on, with a 
smile at her own enthusiasm. "We belong to 
different camps, but that does not prevent my 
esteeming her as she deserves. She is very un- 
fortunate!" added Anna Pdvlovna. 

Supposing that by these words Anna Pav- 
lovna was somewhat lifting the veil from the 
secret of the countess' malady, an unwary young 
man ventured to express surprise that well- 
known doctors had not been called in and that 
the countess was being attended by a charlatan 
who might employ dangerous remedies. 

"Your information may be better than mine," 
Anna Pavlovna suddenly and venomously re- 
torted on the inexperienced young man, "but 
I know on good authority that this doctor is a 
very learned and able man. He is private phy- 
sician to the Queen of Spain." 

And having thus demolished the young man, 
Anna Pavlovna turned to another group where 
Bilibin was talking about the Austrians: hav- 
ing wrinkled up his face he was evidently pre- 
paring to smooth it out again and utter one of 
his mots. 

"I think it is delightful," he said, referring 
to a diplomatic note that had been sent to Vi- 
enna with some Austrian banners captured 
from the French by Wittgenstein, "the hero of 
Petropol" as he was then called in Petersburg. 

"What? What's that?" asked Anna Pdvlovna, 
securing silence for the mot, which she had 
heard before. 

And Bilfbin repeated the actual words of 
the diplomatic dispatch, which he had himself 
composed. 

"The Emperor returns these Austrian ban- 
ners," said Bilibin, "friendly banners gone 
astray and found on a wrong path," and his 
brow became smooth again. 

"Charming, charming!" observed Prince 
Vasili. 

"The path to Warsaw, perhaps," Prince Hip- 
polyte remarked loudly and unexpectedly. Ev- 
erybody looked at him, not understanding what 
he meant. Prince Hippolyte himself glanced 
around with amused surprise. He knew no 
more than the others what his words meant. 
During his diplomatic career he had more than 
once noticed that such utterances were re- 
ceived as very witty, and at every opportunity 
he uttered in that way the first words that en- 
tered his head. "It may turn out very well," he 
thought, "but if not, they'll know how to ar- 
range matters." And really, during the awk- 
ward silence that ensued, that insufficiently pa- 



triotic person entered whom Anna Pdvlovna 
had been waiting for and wished to convert, 
and she, smiling and shaking a finger at Hip- 
polyte, invited Prince Vasfli to the table and 
bringing him two candles and the manuscript 
begged him to begin. Everyone became silent. 

"Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor!" Prince 
Vasili sternly declaimed, looking round at his au- 
dience as if to inquire whether anyone had any- 
thing to say to the contrary. But no one said any- 
thing. "Moscow, our ancient capital, the New Jeru- 
salem, receives her Christ" he placed a sudden 
emphasis on the word her "as a mother receives 
her /calous sons into her arms, and through the 
gathering mists, foreseeing the brilliant glory of thy 
rule, sings in exultation, 'Hosanna, blessed is he 
that cometh!' " 

Prince Vasili pronounced these last words 
in a tearful voice. 

Bilibin attentively examined his nails, and 
many of those present appeared intimidated, 
as if asking in what they were to blame. Anna 
Pdvlovna whispered the next words in advance, 
like an old woman muttering the prayer at 
Communion: "Let the bold and insolent Goli- 
ath . . ." she whispered. 

Prince Vasili continued. 

"Let the bold and insolent Goliath from the 
borders of France encompass the realms of Russia 
with death-bearing terrors; humble Faith, the 
sling of the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his 
head in his blood-thirsty pride. This icon of the 
Venerable Sergius, the servant of God and zealous 
champion of old of our country's weal, is offered 
to Your Imperial Majesty. I grieve that my wan- 
ing strength prevents my rejoicing in the sight of 
your most gracious presence. 1 raise fervent prayers 
to Heaven that the Almighty may exalt the race of 
the just, and mercifully fulfill the desires of Your 
Majesty." 

"What force! What a style!" was uttered in 
approval both of reader and of author. 

Animated by that address Anna Pdvlovna's 
guests talked for a long time of the state of the 
fatherland and offered various conjectures as 
to the result of the battle to be fought in a few 
days. 

"You will see," said Anna Pdvlovna, "that to- 
morrow, on the Emperor's birthday, we shall 
receive news. I have a favorable presentiment!" 

CHAPTER II 

ANNA PAVLOVNA'S presentiment was in fact ful- 
filled. Next day during the service at the palace 
church in honor of the Emperor's birthday, 
Prince Volkdnski was called out of the church 
and received a dispatch from Prince Kutuzov. 



BOOK TWELVE 



535 



It was Kutuzov's report, written from Tatari- 
nova on the day of the battle. Kunizov wrote 
that the Russians had not retreated a step, that 
the French losses were much heavier than ours, 
and that he was writing in haste from the field 
of battle before collecting full information. It 
followed that there must have been a victory. 
And at once, without leaving the church, thanks 
were rendered to the Creator for His help and 
for the victory. 

Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was justified, 
and all that morning a joyously festive mood 
reigned in the city. Everyone believed the vic- 
tory to have been complete, and some even 
spoke of Napoleon's having been captured, of 
his deposition, and of the choice of a new ruler 
for France. 

It is very difficult for events to be reflected in 
their real strength and completeness amid the 
conditions of court life and far from the scene 
of action. General events involuntarily group 
themselves around some particular incident. 
So now the courtiers' pleasure was based as 
much on the fact that the news had arrived on 
the Emperor's birthday as on the fact of the 
victory itself. It was like a successfully arranged 
surprise. Mention was made in Kutuzov's re- 
port of the Russian losses, among which fig- 
ured the names of Tuchk6v, Bagrati6n, and 
Kutaysov. In the Petersburg world this sad 
side of the affair again involuntarily centered 
round a single incident: Kutdysov's death. Ev- 
erybody knew him, the Emperor liked him, and 
he was young and interesting. That day every- 
one met with the words: 

"What a wonderful coincidence! Just during 
the service. But what a loss Kutdysov is! How 
sorry I am!" 

"Whatdid I tell you about Kutiizov?" Prince 
Vasfli now said with a prophet's pride. "1 al- 
ways said he was the only man capable of de- 
feating Napoleon." 

But next day no news arrived from the army 
and the public mood grew anxious. The 
courtiers suffered because of the suffering the 
suspense occasioned the Emperor. 

"Fancy the Emperor's position!" said they, 
and instead of extolling Kutiizov as they had 
done the day before, they condemned him as 
the cause of the Emperor's anxiety. That day 
Prince Vasili no longer boasted of his protege* 
Kutiizov, but remained silent when the com- 
mander in chief was mentioned. Moreover, 
toward evening, as if everything conspired to 
make Petersburg society anxious and uneasy, 
a terrible piece of news was added. Countess 



Hdene Beziikhova had suddenly died of that 
terrible malady it had been so agreeable to 
mention. Officially, at large gatherings, every- 
one said that Countess Beziikhova had died of 
a terrible attack of angina pectoris, but in in- 
timate circles details were mentioned of how 
the private physician of the Queen of Spain 
had prescribed small doses of a certain drug to 
produce a certain effect; but H61ne, tortured 
by the fact that the old count suspected her 
and that her husband to whom she had written 
(that wretched, profligate Pierre) had not re- 
plied, had suddenly taken a very large dose of 
the drug, and had died in agony before assist- 
ance could be rendered her. It was said that 
Prince Vasfli and the old count had turned 
upon the Italian, but the latter had produced 
such letters from the unfortunate deceased 
that they had immediately let the matter drop. 

Talk in general centered round three melan- 
choly facts: the Emperor's lack of news, the loss 
of Kutaysov, and the death of Hlne. 

On the third day after Kutuzov's report a 
country gentleman arrived from Moscow, and 
news of the surrender of Moscow to the French 
spread through the whole town. This was ter- 
rible! What a position for the Emperor to be 
in! Kutiizov was a traitor, and Prince Vasfli 
during the visits of condolence paid to him 
on the occasion of his daughter's death said of 
Kutiizov, whom he had formerly praised (it 
was excusable for him in his grief to forget what 
he had said), that it was impossible to expect 
anything else from a blind and depraved old 
man. 

"I only wonder that the fate of Russia could 
have been entrusted to such a man." 

As long as this news remained unofficial it 
was possible to doubt it, but the next day the 
following communication was received from 
Count Rostopchin: 

Prince Kutiizo\ 's adjutant has brought me a let- 
ter in which he demands police officers to guide 
the army to the Ryazan road. He writes that he is 
regretfully abandoning Moscow. Sire! Kutuzov's 
action decides the fate of the capital and of your 
empire! Russia will shudder to learn of the aban- 
donment of the city in which her greatness is cen- 
tered and in which lie the ashes of your ancestors! 
I shall follow the army. I have had everything re- 
moved, and it only remains for me to weep over 
the fate of my fatherland. 

On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent 
Prince Volk6nski to Kutiizov with the follow- 
ing rescript: 

Prince Michael Ilari6novich! Since the twenty- 



536 

ninth of August I have received no communica- 
tion from you, yet on the first of September I re- 
ceived from the commander in chief of Moscow, 
via Yaroslavl, the sad news that you, with the 
army, have decided to abandon Moscow. You can 
yourself imagine the effect this news has had on 
me, and your silence increases my astonishment. I 
am sending this by Adjutant-General Prince Vol- 
kdnski, to hear from you the situation of the army 
and the reasons that have induced you to take this 
melancholy decision. 

CHAPTER III 

NINE DAYS after the abandonment of Moscow, 
a messenger from Kutuzov reached Petersburg 
with the official announcement of that event. 
This messenger was Michaud, a Frenchman 
who did not know Russian, but who was quoi- 
que Stranger, russe de cceur et d'dme* as he 
said of himself. 

The Emperor at once received this messenger 
in his study at the palace on Stone Island. Mi- 
chaud, who had never seen Moscow before the 
campaign and who did not know Russian, yet 
felt deeply moved (as he wrote) when he ap- 
peared before notre trts gracieux souverain * 
with the news of the burning of Moscow, dont 
les flammes tclairaient sa route. 3 

Though the source of M. Michaud's chagrin 
must have been different from that which 
caused Russians to grieve, he had such a sad 
face when shown into the Emperor's study that 
the latter at once asked: 

"Have you brought me sad news, Colonel?" 

"Very sad, sire/' replied Michaud, lowering 
his eyes with a sigh. "The abandonment of 
Moscow." 

"Have they surrendered my ancient capital 
without a battle?" asked the Emperor quickly, 
his face suddenly flushing. 

Michaud respectfully delivered the message 
Kutuzov had entrusted to him, which was that 
it had been impossible to fight before Moscow, 
and that as the only remaining choice was be- 
tween losing the army as well as Moscow, or 
losing Moscow alone, the field marshal had to 
choose the latter. 

The Emperor listened in silence, not look- 
ing at Michaud. 

"Has the enemy entered the city?" he asked. 

"Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes. I 
left it all in flames," replied Michaud in a de- 
cided tone, but glancing at the Emperor he 
was frightened by what he had done. 

1 Though a foreigner, Russian in heart and soul. 

* Our most gracious sovereign. 

' Whose flames illumined his route. 



WAR AND PEACE 

The Emperor began to breathe heavily and 
rapidly, his lower lip trembled, and tears in- 
stantly appeared in his fine blue eyes. 

But this lasted only a moment. He suddenly 
frowned, as if blaming himself for his weakness, 
and raising his head addressed Michaud in a 
firm voice: 

"I see, Colonel, from all that is happening, 
that Providence requires great sacrifices of us. 
... I am ready to submit myself in all things 
to His will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you 
leave the army when it saw my ancient capital 
abandoned without a battle? Did you not no- 
tice discouragement? . . ." 

Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm 
once more, Michaud also grew calm, but was 
not immediately ready to reply to the Emper- 
or's direct and relevant question which re- 
quired a direct answer. 

"Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly 
as befits a loyal soldier?" he asked to gain time. 

"Colonel, I always require it," replied the 
Emperor. "Conceal nothing from me, I wish 
to know absolutely how things are." 

"Sirel" said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely 
perceptible smile on his lips, having now pre- 
pared a well-phrased reply, "sire, I left the 
whole army, from its chiefs to the lowest sol- 
dier, without exception in desperate and ago- 
nized terror . . ." 

"How is that?" the Emperor interrupted 
him, frowning sternly. "Would misfortune 
make my Russians lose heart? . . . Never!" 

Michaud had only waited for this to bring 
out the phrase he had prepared. 

"Sire," he said, with respectful playfulness, 
"they are only afraid lest Your Majesty, in the 
goodness of your heart, should allow yourself 
to be persuaded to make peace. They are burn- 
ing for the combat," declared this representa- 
tive of the Russian nation, "and to prove to 
Your Majesty by the sacrifice of their lives how 
devoted they are " 

"Ah!" said the Emperor reassured, and with 
a kindly gleam in his eyes, he patted Michaud 
on the shoulder. "You set me at ease, Colonel." 

He bent his head and was silent for some 
time. 

"Well, then, go back to the army/' he said, 
drawing himself up to his full height and ad- 
dressing Michaud with a gracious and majestic 
gesture, "and tell our brave men and all my 
good subjects wherever you go that when I have 
not a soldier left I shall put myself at the head 
of my beloved nobility and my good peasants 
andsouse the last resources of my empire. It still 



offers me more than my enemies suppose," said 
the Emperor growing more and more ani- 
mated; "but should it ever be ordained by Di- 
vine Providence," he continued, raising to heav- 
en his fine eyes shining with emotion, "that my 
dynasty should cease to reign on the throne of 
my ancestors, then after exhausting all the 
means at my command, I shall let my beard 
grow to here" (he pointed halfway down his 
chest) "and go and eat potatoes with the mean- 
est of my peasants, rather than sign the dis- 
grace of my country and of my beloved people 
whose sacrifices I know how to appreciate." 

Having uttered these words in an agitated 
voice the Emperor suddenly turned away as if 
to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his 
eyes, and went to the further end of his study. 
Having stood there a few moments, he strode 
back to Michaud and pressed his arm below 
the elbow with a vigorous movement. The Em- 
peror's mild and handsome face was flushed 
and his eyes gleamed with resolution and an- 
ger. 

"Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I say 
to you here, perhaps we may recall it with pleas- 
ure someday . . . Napoleon or I," said the Em- 
peror, touching his breast. "We can no longer 
both reign together. I have learned to know 
him, and he will not deceive me any more. . . ." 

And the Emperor paused, with a frown. 

When he heard these words and saw the ex- 
pression of firm resolution in the Emperor's 
eyes, Michaud quoique etranger, russe de 
cceur et d'dmeat that solemn moment felt 
himself enraptured by all that he had heard 
(as he used afterwards to say), and gave ex- 
pression to his own feelings and those of the 
Russian people whose representative he con- 
sidered himself to be, in the following words: 

"Sirel" said he, "Your Majesty is at this mo- 
ment signing the glory of the nation and the 
salvation of Europe!" 

With an inclination of the head the Emper- 
or dismissed him. 



CHAPTER IV 

IT is NATURAL for us who were not living in 
those days to imagine that when half Russia 
had been conquered and the inhabitants were 
fleeing to distant provinces, and one levy after 
another was being raised for the defense of the 
fatherland, all Russians from the greatest to 
the least were solely engaged in sacrificing 
themselves, saving their fatherland, or weep- 
ing over its downfall. The tales and descrip- 
tions of that time without exception speak on- 



BOOK TWELVE 537 

ly of the self-sacrifice, patriotic devotion, de- 
spair, grief, and the heroism of the Russians. 
But it was not really so. It appears so to us be- 
cause we see only the general historic interest 
of that time and do not see all the personal 
human interests that people had. Yet in reality 
those personal interests of the moment so much 
transcend the general interests that they al- 
ways prevent the public interest from being felt 
or even noticed. Most of the people at that 
time paid no attention to the general progress 
of events but were guided only by their private 
interests, and they were the very people whose 
activities at that period were most useful. 

Those who tried to understand the general 
course of events and to take part in it by self- 
sacrifice and heroism were the most useless 
members of society, they saw everything up- 
side down, and all they did for the common 
good turned out to be useless and foolishlike 
Pierre's and Mamonov's regiments which loot- 
ed Russian villages, and the lint the young 
ladies prepared and that never reached the 
wounded, and so on. Even those, fond of in- 
tellectual talk and of expressing their feelings, 
who discussed Russia's position at the time in- 
voluntarily introduced into their conversation 
either a shade of pretense and falsehood or use- 
less condemnation and anger directed against 
people accused of actions no one could pos- 
sibly be guilty of. In historic events the rule 
forbidding us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of 
Knowledge is specially applicable. Only un- 
conscious action bears fruit, and he who plays 
a part in an historic event never understands 
its significance. If he tries to realize it his efforts 
are fruitless. 

The more closely a man was engaged in the 
events then taking place in Russia the less did 
he realize their significance. In Petersburg and 
in the provinces at a distance from Moscow, 
ladies, and gentlemen in militia uniforms, 
wept for Russia and its ancient capital and 
talked of self-sacrifice and so on; but in the ar- 
my which retired beyond Moscow there was 
little talk or thought of Moscow, and when 
they caught sight of its burned ruins no one 
swore to be avenged on the French, but they 
thought about their next pay, their next quar- 
ters, of Matreshka the vivandiere, and like 
matters. 

As the war had caught him in the service, 
Nicholas Rost6v took a close and prolonged 
part in the defense of his country, but did so 
casually, without any aim at self-sacritice, and 
he therefore looked at what was going on in 



538 WAR AND PEACE 

Russia without despair and without dismally 
racking his brains over it. Had he been asked 
what he thought of the state of Russia, he 
would have said that it was not his business to 
think about it, that Kutuzov and others were 
there for that purpose, but that he had heard 
that the regiments were to be made up to their 
full strength, that fighting would probably go 
on for a long time yet, and that things being 
so it was quite likely he might be in command 
of a regiment in a couple of years' time. 

As he looked at the matter in this way, he 
learned that he was being sent to Voronezh to 
buy remounts for his division, not only with- 
out regret at being prevented from taking part 
in the coming battle, but with the greatest 
pleasure which he did not conceal and which 
his comrades fully understood. 

A few days before the battle of Borodin6, 
Nicholas received the necessary money and war- 
rants, and having sent some hussars on in ad- 
vance, he set out with post horses for Vor6nezh. 

Only a man who has experienced it that is, 
has passed some months continuously in an at- 
mosphere of campaigning and war can under- 
stand the delight Nicholas felt when he es- 
caped from the region covered by the army's 
foraging operations, provision trains, and hos- 
pitals. When free from soldiers, wagons, and 
the filthy traces of a camp he saw villages with 
peasants and peasant women, gentlemen's 
country houses, fields where cattle were graz- 
ing, posthouses with stationmasters asleep in 
them, he rejoiced as though seeing all this for 
the first time. What for a long while specially 
surprised and delighted him were the women, 
young and healthy, without a dozen officers 
making up to each of them; women, too, who 
were pleased and flattered that a passing offi- 
cer should joke with them. 

In the highest spirits Nicholas arrived at 
night at a hotel in Vor6nezh, ordered things 
he had long been deprived of in camp, and 
next day, very clean-shaven and in a full-dress 
uniform he had not worn for a long time, went 
to present himself to the authorities. 

The commander of the militia was a civilian 
general, an old man who was evidently pleased 
with his military designation and rank. He re- 
ceived Nicholas brusquely (imagining this to 
be characteristically military) and questioned 
him with an important air, as if considering 
the general progress of affairs and approving 
and disapproving with full right to do so. 
Nicholas was in such good spirits that this 
merely amused him. 



From the commander of the militia he drove 
to the governor. The governor was a brisk 
little man, very simple and affable. He indi- 
cated the stud farms at which Nicholas might 
procure horses, recommended to him a horse 
dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen 
miles out of town who had the best horses, and 
promised to assist him in every way. 

"You are Count Ilyi Rost6v's son? My wife 
was a great friend of your mother's. We are at 
home on Thursdays today is Thursday, so 
please come and see us quite informally," said 
the governor, taking leave of him. 

Immediately on leaving the governor's, Nich- 
olas hired post horses and, taking his squad- 
ron quartermaster with him, drove at a gallop 
to the landowner, fourteen miles away, who 
had the stud. Everything seemed to him pleas- 
ant and easy during that first part of his stay 
in Vor6nezh and, as usually happens when a 
man is in a pleasant state of mind, everything 
went well and easily. 

The landowner to whom Nicholas went was 
a bachelor, an old cavalryman, a horse fancier, 
a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old 
brandy and some old Hungarian wine, who 
had a snuggery where he smoked, and who 
owned some splendid horses. 

In very few words Nicholas bought seven- 
teen picked stallions for six thousand rubles 
to serve, as he said, as samples of his remounts. 
After dining and taking rather too much of 
the Hungarian wine, Nicholas having ex- 
changed kisses with the landowner, with whom 
he was already on the friendliest terms gal- 
loped back over abominable roads, in the 
brightest frame of mind, continually urging 
on the driver so as to be in time for the gov- 
ernor's party. 

When he had changed, poured water over 
his head, and scented himself, Nicholas arrived 
at the governor's rather late, but with the 
phrase "better late than never" on his lips. 

It was not a ball, nor had dancing been an- 
nounced, but everyone knew that Catherine 
Petr6vna would play valses and the tcossaise 
on the clavichord and that there would be 
dancing, and so everyone had corneas to a ball. 

Provincial life in 1812 went on very much 
as usual, but with this difference, that it was 
livelier in the towns in consequence of the ar- 
rival of many wealthy families from Moscow, 
and as in everything that went on in Russia at 
that time a special recklessness was noticeable, 
an "in for a penny, in for a poundwho cares?" 
spirit, and the inevitable small talk, instead of 



BOOK TWELVE 



5S9 



turning on the weather and mutual acquaint- 
ances, now turned on Moscow, the army, and 
Napoleon. 

The society gathered together at the gover- 
nor's was the best in Vor6nezh. 

There were a great many ladies and some of 
Nicholas* Moscow acquaintances, but there 
were no men who could at all vie with the cav- 
alier of St. George, the hussar remount officer, 
the good-natured and well-bred Count Rost6v. 
Among the men was an Italian prisoner, an 
officer of the French army; and Nicholas felt that 
the presence of that prisoner enhanced his own 
importance as a Russian hero. The Italian was, 
as it were, a war trophy. Nicholas felt this, it 
seemed to him that everyone regarded the Ital- 
ian in the same light, and he treated him cor- 
dially though with dignity and restraint. 

As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar 
uniform, diffusing around him a fragrance of 
perfume and wine, and had uttered the words 
"better late than never" and heard them re- 
peated several times by others, people clustered 
around him; all eyes turned on him, and he 
felt at once that he had entered into his prop- 
er position in the province that of a universal 
favorite: a very pleasant position, and intox- 
icatingly so after his long privations. At post- 
ing stations, at inns, and in the landowner's 
snuggery, maidservants had been flattered by 
his notice, and here too at the governor's party 
there were (as it seemed to Nicholas) an inex- 
haustible number of pretty young women, mar- 
ried and unmarried, impatiently awaiting his 
notice. The women and girls flirted with him 
and, from the first day, the old people concerned 
themselves to get this fine young daredevil of an 
hussar married and settled down. Among these 
was the governor's wife herself, who welcomed 
Rost6v as a near relative and called him "Nich- 
olas." 

Catherine Petrdvna did actually play valses 
and the tcossaise, and dancing began in which 
Nicholas still further captivated the provincial 
society by his agility. His particularly free man- 
ner of dancing even surprised them all. Nicho- 
las was himself rather surprised at the way he 
danced that evening. He had never danced like 
that in Moscow and would even have consid- 
ered such a very free and easy manner improp- 
er and in bad form, but here he felt it incum- 
bent on him to astonish them all by something 
unusual, something they would have to accept 
as the regular thing in the capital though new 
to them in the provinces. 

All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a 



blue-eyed, plump and pleasing little blonde, 
the wife of one of the provincial officials. With 
the naive conviction of young men in a merry 
mood that other men's wives were created for 
them, Rost6v did not leave the lady's side and 
treated her husband in a friendly and conspira- 
torial style, as if, without speaking of it, they 
knew how capitally Nicholas and the lady 
would get on together. The husband, however, 
did not seem to share that conviction and tried 
to behave morosely with Rost6v. But the lat- 
ter's good-natured nai'vet was so boundless 
that sometimes even he involuntarily yielded 
to Nicholas* good humor. Toward the end of 
the evening, however, as the wife's face grew 
more flushed and animated, the husband's be- 
came more and more melancholy and solemn, 
as though there were but a given amount of 
animation between them and as the wife's 
share increased the husband's diminished. 

CHAPTER V 

NICHOLAS SAT leaning slightly forward in an 
armchair, bending closely over the blonde lady 
and paying her mythological compliments with 
a smile that never left his face. Jauntily shift- 
ing the position of his legs in their tight rid- 
ing breeches, diffusing an odor of perfume, 
and admiring his partner, himself, and the fine 
outlines of his legs in their well-fitting Hessian 
boots, Nicholas told the blonde lady that he 
wished to run away with a certain lady here in 
Vor6nezh. 

"Which lady?" 

"A charming lady, a divine one. Her eyes" 
(Nicholas looked at his partner) "are blue, her 
mouth coral and ivory; her figure" (he glanced 
at her shoulders) "like Diana's. . . ." 

The husband came up and sullenly asked his 
wife what she was talking about. 

"Ah, Nikita Ivzhiych!" cried Nicholas, rising 
politely, and as if wishing Nikita Ivnych to 
share his joke, he began to tell him of his in- 
tention to elope with a blonde lady. 

The husband smiled gloomily, the wife gaily. 
The governor's good-natured wife came up 
with a look of disapproval. 

"Anna Ignityevna wants to see you, Nicho- 
las," said she, pronouncing the name so that 
Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ignat- 
yevna was a very important person. "Come, 
Nicholasl You know you let me call you so?" 

"Oh, yes, Aunt. Who is she?" 

"Anna Igndtyevna Malvintseva. She has 
heard from her niece how you rescued her. . . . 
Can you guess?" 



540 

"I rescued such a lot of them!" said Nic^io- 
las. 

"Her niece, Princess Bolk6nskaya. She is here 
in Vor6nezh with her aunt. Oho! How you 
blush. Why, are . . . ?" 

"Not a bit! Please don't, Aunt!" 

"Very well, very well! . . . Oh, what a fellow 
you are!" 

The governor's wife led him up to a tall and 
very stout old lady with a blue headdress, who 
had just finished her game of cards with the 
most important personages of the town. This 
was Malvintseva, Princess Mary's aunt on her 
mother's side, a rich, childless widow who al- 
ways lived in Voronezh. When Rost6v ap- 
proached her she was standing settling up for 
the game. She looked at him and, screwing up 
her eyes sternly, continued to upbraid the gen- 
eral who had won from her. 

"Very pleased, mon cher" she then said, 
holding out her hand to Nicholas. "Pray come 
and see me." 

After a few words about Princess Mary and 
her late father, whom Malvintseva had evident- 
ly not liked, and having asked what Nicholas 
knew of Prince Andrew, who also was evident- 
ly no favorite of hers, the important old lady 
dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invita- 
tion to come to see her. 

Nicholas promised to come and blushed 
again as he bowed. At the mention of Princess 
Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and 
even of fear, which he himself did not under- 
stand. 

When he had parted from Malvintseva Nich- 
olas wished to return to the dancing, but the 
governor's little wife placed her plump hand 
on his sleeve and, saying that she wanted to 
have a talk with him, led him to her sitting 
room, from which those who were there imme- 
diately withdrew so as not to be in her way. 

"Do you know, dear boy," began the gov- 
ernor's wife with a serious expression on her 
kind little face, "that really would be the match 
for you: would you like me to arrange it?" 

"Whom do you mean, Aunt?" asked Nicho- 
las. 

"I will make a match for you with the prin- 
cess. Catherine Petr6vna speaks of Lily, but I 
say, no the princess! Do you want me to do it? 
I am sure your mother will be grateful to me. 
What a charming girl she is, really! And she 
is not at all so plain, either." 

"Not at all," replied Nicholas as if offended 
at the idea. "As befits a soldier, Aunt, I don't 
force myself on anyone or refuse anything," he 



AND PEACE 

said before he had time to consider what he 
was saying. 

"Well then, remember, this is not a joke!" 

"Of course not!" 

"Yes, yes," the governor's wife said as if talk- 
ing to herself. "But, my dear boy, among oth- 
er things you are too attentive to the other, 
the blonde. One is sorry for the husband, 
really. . . ." 

"Oh no, we are good friends with him," said 
Nicholas in the simplicity of his heart; it did 
not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant 
to himself might not be pleasant to someone 
else. 

"But what nonsense 1 have been saying to 
the governor's wife!" thought Nicholas sud- 
denly at supper. "She will really begin to ar- 
range a match . . . and Sonya . . . ?" And on 
taking leave of the governor's wife, when she 
again smilingly said to him, "Well then, re- 
member!" he drew her aside. 

"But see here, to tell you the truth, Aunt . . ." 

"What is it, my dear? Come, let's sit down 
here," said she. 

Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to 
tell his most intimate thoughts (which he 
would not have told to his mother, his sister, 
or his friend) to this woman who was almost a 
stranger. When he afterwards recalled that im- 
pulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness 
which had very important results for him, it 
seemed to him as it seems to everyone in such 
cases that it was merely some silly whim that 
seized him: yet that burst of frankness, to- 
gether with other trifling events, had immense 
consequences for him and for all his family. 

"You see, Aunt, Mamma has long wanted 
me to marry an heiress, but the very idea of 
marrying for money is repugnant to me." 

"Oh yes, I understand," said the governor's 
wife. 

"But Princess Bolk6nskaya that's another 
matter. I will tell you the truth. In the first 
place I like her very much, I feel drawn to her; 
and then, after I met her under such circum- 
stancesso strangely, the idea of ten occurred to 
me: 'This is fate.' Especially if you remember 
that Mamma had long been thinking of it; but 
I had never happened to meet her before, some- 
how it had always happened that we did not 
meet. And as long as my sister Natasha was en- 
gaged to her brother it was of course out of 
the question for me to think of marrying her. 
And it must needs happen that I should meet 
her just when Natdsha's engagement had been 
broken off ... and then everything , , . So you 



BOOK TWELVE 



see ... I never told this to anyone and never 
will, only to you." 

The governor's wife pressed his elbow grate- 
fully. 

"You know S6nya, my cousin? I love her, and 
promised to marry her, and will do so. ... So 
you see there can be no question about" said 
Nicholas incoherently and blushing. 

"My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You 
know S6nya has nothing and you yourself say 
your Papa's affairs are in a very bad way. And 
what about your mother? It would kill her, 
that's one thing. And what sort of life would 
it be for S6nya if she's a girl with a heart? 
Your mother in despair, and you all ruined. . . . 
No, my dear, you and S6nya ought to under- 
stand that." 

Nicholas remained silent. It comforted him 
to hear these arguments. 

"All the same, Aunt, it is impossible," he re- 
joined with a sigh, after a short pause. "Be- 
sides, would the princess have me? And besides, 
she is now in mourning. How can one think of 
it!" 

"But you don't suppose I'm going to get you 
married at once? There is always a right way 
of doing things," replied the governor's wife. 

"What a matchmaker you are, Aunt . . ." said 
Nicholas, kissing her plump little hand. 

CHAPTER VI 

ON REACHING Moscow after her meeting with 
Rost6v, Princess Mary had found her nephew 
there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince 
Andrew giving her instructions how to get to 
her Aunt Malvfntseva at Vor6nezh. That feel- 
ing akin to temptation which had tormented 
her during her father's illness, since his death, 
and especially since her meeting with Rost6v 
was smothered by arrangements for the jour- 
ney, anxiety about her brother, settling in a 
new house, meeting new people, and attend- 
ing to her nephew's education. She was sad. 
Now, after a month passed in quiet sur- 
roundings, she felt more and more deeply the 
loss of her father which was associated in her 
mind with the ruin of Russia. She was agitat- 
ed and incessantly tortured by the thought of 
the dangers to which her brother, the only in- 
timate person now remaining to her, was ex- 
posed. She was worried too about her nephew's 
education for which she had always felt her- 
self incompetent, but in the depths of her soul 
she felt at peace a peace arising from con- 
sciousness of having stifled those personal 
dreams and hopes that had been on the point 



of awakening within her and were related to 
her meeting with Rost6v. 

The day after her party the governor's wife 
came to see Malvintseva and, after discussing 
her plan with the aunt, remarked that though 
under present circumstances a formal betroth- 
al was, of course, not to be thought of, all the 
same the young people might be brought to- 
gether and could get to know one another. 
Malvintseva expressed approval, and the gov- 
ernor's wife began to speakof Rost6vin Mary's 
presence, praising him and telling how he had 
blushed when Princess Mary's name was men- 
tioned. But Princess Mary experienced a pain- 
ful rather than a joyful feeling her mental 
tranquillity was destroyed, and desires, doubts, 
self-reproach, and hopes reawoke. 

During the two days that elapsed before Ros- 
t6v called, Princess Mary continually thought 
of how she ought to behave to him. First she 
decided not to come to the drawing room when 
he called to see her aunt that it would not be 
proper for her, in her deep mourning, to re- 
ceive visitors; then she thought this would be 
rude after what he had done for her; then it 
occurred to her that her aunt and the gover- 
nor's wife had intentions concerning herself 
and Rost6v their looks and words at times 
seemed to confirm this supposition then she 
told herself tnat only she, with her sinful na- 
ture, could think this of them: they could not 
forget that situated as she was, while still wear- 
ing deep mourning, such matchmaking would 
be an insult to her and to her father's memory. 
Assuming that she did go down to see him, 
Princess Mary imagined the words he would 
say to her and what she would say to him, and 
these words sometimes seemed undeservedly 
cold and then to mean too much. More than 
anything she feared lest the confusion she felt 
might overwhelm her and betray her as soon 
as she saw him. 

But when on Sunday after church the foot- 
man announced in the drawing room that 
Count Rostov had called, the princess showed 
no confusion, only a slight blush suffused her 
cheeks and her eyes lit up with a new and ra- 
diant light. 

"You have met him, Aunt?" said she in a 
calm voice, unable herself to understand that 
she could be outwardly so calm and natural. 

When Rost6v entered the room, the princess 
dropped her eyes for an instant, as if to give 
the visitor time to greet her aunt, and then just 
as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head 
and met his Iqpk with shining eyes. With a 



54* 



WAR AND PEACE 



movement full of dignity and grace she half 
rose with a smile of pleasure, held out her slen- 
der, delicate hand to him, and began to speak 
in a voice in which for the first time new deep 
womanly notes vibrated. Mademoiselle Bouri- 
enne, who was in the drawing room, looked at 
Princess Mary in bewildered surprise. Herself 
a consummate coquette, she could not have 
maneuvered better on meeting a man she 
wished to attract. 

"Either black is particularly becoming to 
her or she really has greatly improved without 
my having noticed it. And above all, what tact 
and grace!" thought Mademoiselle Bourienne. 

Had Princess Mary been capableof reflection 
at that moment, she would have been more 
surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the 
change that had taken place in herself. From 
the moment she recognized that dear, loved 
face, a new life force took possession of her 
and compelled her to speak and act apart from 
her own will. From the time Rostov entered, 
her face became suddenly transformed. It was 
as if a light had been kindled in a carved and 
painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, ar- 
tistic work on its sides, that previously seemed 
dark, coarse, and meaningless, was suddenly 
shown up in unexpected and striking beauty. 
For the first time all that pure, spiritual, in- 
ward travail through which she had lived ap- 
peared on the surface. All her inward labor, 
her dissatisfaction with herself, her sufferings, 
her strivings after goodness, her meekness, love, 
and self-sacrifice all this now shone in those 
radiant eyes, in her delicate smile, and in ev- 
ery trait of her gentle face. 

Rost6v saw all this as clearly as if he had 
known her whole life. He felt that the being 
before him was quite different from, and bet- 
ter than, anyone he had met before, and above 
all better than himself. 

Their conversation was very simple and un- 
important. They spoke of the war, and like 
everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their 
sorrow about it; they spoke of their last meet- 
ingNicholas trying to change the subject 
they talked of the governor's kind wife, of Nich- 
olas' relations, and of Princess Mary's. 

She did not talk about her brother, divert- 
ing the conversation as soon as her aunt men- 
tioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak of 
Russia's misfortunes with a certain artificiality, 
but her brother was too near her heart and she 
neither could nor would speak lightly of him. 
Nicholas noticed this, as he noticed every 
shade of Princess Mary's character with an ob- 



servation unusual to him, and everything con- 
firmed his conviction that she was a quite un- 
usual and extraordinary being. Nicholas 
blushed and was confused when people spoke 
to him about the princess (as she did when he 
was mentioned) and even when he thought of 
her, but in her presence he felt quite at ease, 
and said not at all what he had prepared, but 
what, quite appropriately, occurred to him at 
the moment. 

When a pause occurred during his short 
vist, Nicholas, as is usual when there are chil- 
dren, turned to Prince Andrew's little son, ca- 
ressing him and asking whether he would like 
to be an hussar. He took the boy on his knee, 
played with him, and looked round at Princess 
Mary. With a softened, happy, and timid look 
she watched the boy she loved in the arms of 
the man she loved. Nicholas also noticed that 
look and, as if understanding it, flushed with 
pleasure and began to kiss the boy with good- 
natured playfulness. 

As she was in mourning Princess Mary did 
not go out into society, and Nicholas did not 
think it the proper thing to visit her again; but 
all the same the governor's wife went on with 
her matchmaking, passing on to Nicholas the 
flattering things Princess Mary said of him and 
vice versa, and insisting on his declaring him- 
self to Princess Mary. For this purpose she ar- 
ranged a meeting between the young people at 
the bishop's house before Mass. 

Though Rostov told the governor's wife that 
he would not make any declaration to Princess 
Mary, he promised to go. 

As at Tilsit Rostov had not allowed himself 
to doubt that what everybody considered right 
was right, so now, after a short but sincere strug- 
gle between his effort to arrange his life by his 
own sense of justice, and in obedient submis- 
sion to circumstances, he chose the latter and 
yielded to the power he felt irresistibly carry- 
ing him he knew not where. He knew that aft- 
er his promise to S6nya it would be what he 
deemed base to declare his feelings to Princess 
Mary. And he knew that he would never act 
basely. But he also knew (or rather felt at the 
bottom of his heart) that by resigning himself 
now to the force of circumstances and to those 
who were guiding him, he was not only doing 
nothing wrong, but was doing something very 
very important more important than anything 
he had ever done in his life. 

After meeting Princess Mary, though the 
course of his life went on externally as before, 
all his former amusements lost their charm for 



BOOK TWELVE 

lim and he often thought about her. But he 
lever thought about her as he had thought of 
ill the young ladies without exception whom 
he had met in society, nor as he had for a long 
.ime, and at one time rapturously, thought 
ibout S6nya. He had pictured each of those 
roung ladies as almost all honest-hearted young 
men do, that is, as a possible wife, adapting 
her in his imagination to all the conditions of 
married life: a white dressing gown, his wife 
it the tea table, his wife's carriage, little ones, 
Mamma and Papa, their relations to her, and 
o on and these pictures of the future had giv- 
zn him pleasure. But with Princess Mary, to 
whom they were trying to get him engaged, he 
could never picture anything of future mar- 
ried life. If he tried, his pictures seemed in- 
congruous and false. It made him afraid. 



543 



CHAPTER VII 

THE DREADFUL NEWS of the battle of Borodino, 
of our losses in killed and wounded, and the 
still more terrible news of the loss of Moscow 
reached Voronezh in the middle of September. 
Princess Mary, having learned of her brother's 
wound only from the Gazette and having no 
definite news of him, prepared (so Nicholas 
beard, he had not seen her again himself) to set 
off in search of Prince Andrew. 

When he received the news of the battle of 
Borodin6 and the abandonment of Moscow, 
Rost6v was not seized with despair, anger, the 
desire for vengeance, or any feeling of that 
kind, but everything in Vor6nezh suddenly 
seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he ex- 
perienced an indefinite feeling of shame and 
awkwardness. The conversations he heard 
seemed to him insincere; he did not know how 
to judge all these affairs and felt that only in 
the regiment would everything again become 
clear to him. He made haste to finish buying 
the horses, and often became unreasonably an- 
gry with his servant and squadron quartermas- 
ter. 

A few days before his departure a special 
thanksgiving, at which Nicholas was present, 
was held in the cathedral for the Russian vic- 
tory. He stood a little behind the governor and 
held himself with military decorum through 
the service, meditating on a great variety of 
subjects. When the service was over the gov- 
ernor's wife beckoned him to her. 

"Have you seen the princess?" she asked, 
indicating with a movement of her head a lady 
standing on the opposite side, beyond the 
choir. 



Nicholas immediately recognized Princess 
Mary not so much by the profile he saw under 
her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude, ti- 
midity, and pity that immediately overcame 
him. Princess Mary, evidently engrossed by her 
thoughts, was crossing herself for the last time 
before leaving the church. 

Nicholas looked at her face with surprise. It 
was the same face he had seen before, there 
was the same general expression of refined, in- 
ner, spiritual labor, but now it was quite dif- 
ferently lit up. There was a pathetic expres- 
sion of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. As had 
occurred before when she was present, Nicho- 
las went up to her without waiting to be 
prompted by the governor's wife and not ask- 
ing himself whether or not it was right and 
proper to address her here in church, and told 
her he had heard of her trouble and sympa- 
thized with his whole soul. As soon as she heard 
his voice a vivid glow kindled in her face, light- 
ing up both her sorrow and her joy. 

"There is one thing I wanted to tell you, 
Princess," said Rostov. "It is that if your broth- 
er, Prince Andrew Nikolaevich, were not living, 
it would have been at once announced in the 
Gazette, as he is a colonel." 

The princess looked at him, not grasping 
what he was saying, but cheered by the expres- 
sion of regretful sympathy on his face. 

"And I have known so many cases of a splin- 
ter wound" (the Gazette said it was a shell) 
"either proving fatal at once or being very 
slight," continued Nicholas. "We must hope 
for the best, and I am sure ..." 

Princess Mary interrupted him. 

"Oh, that would be so dread . . ." she began 
and, prevented by agitation from finishing, she 
bent her head with a movement as graceful as 
everything she did in his presence and, look- 
ing up at him gratefully, went out, following 
her aunt. 

That evening Nicholas did not go out, but 
stayed at home to settle some accounts with 
the horse dealers. When he had finished that 
business it was already too late to go anywhere 
but still too early to go to bed, and for a long 
time he paced up and down the room, reflect- 
ing on his life, a thing he rarely did. 

Princess Mary had made an agreeable im- 
pression on him when he had met her in Smo- 
16nsk province. His having encountered her 
in such exceptional circumstances, and his 
mother having at one time mentioned her to 
him as a good match, had drawn his particular 
attention to her. When he met her again in 



544 

Vor6nezh the impression she made on him was 
not merely pleasing but powerful. Nicholas 
had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty 
he observed in her at this time. He was, how- 
ever, preparing to go away and it had not en- 
tered his head to regret that he was thus de- 
priving himself of chances of meeting her. But 
that day's encounter in church had, he felt, 
sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace 
of mind. That pale, sad, refined face, that radi- 
ant look, those gentle graceful gestures, and 
especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed 
in all her features agitated him and evoked his 
sympathy. In men Rost6v could not bear to see 
the expression of a higher spiritual life (that 
was why he did not like Prince Andrew) and 
he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy 
and dreaminess, but in Princess Mary that very 
sorrow which revealed the depth of a whole 
spiritual world foreign to him was an irresist- 
ible attraction. 

"She must be a wonderful woman. A real 
angel!" he said to himself. "Why am I not 
free? Why was I in such a hurry with S6nya?" 
And he involuntarily compared the two: the 
lack of spirituality in the one and the abun- 
dance of it in the other a spirituality he him- 
self lacked and therefore valued most highly. 
He tried to picture what would happen were 
he free. How he would propose to her and how 
she would become his wife. But no, he could 
not imagine that. He felt awed, and no clear 
picture presented itself to his mind. He had 
long ago pictured to himself a future with S6n- 
ya, and that was all clear and simple just be- 
cause it had all been thought out and he knew 
all there was in S6nya, but it was impossible to 
picture a future with Princess Mary, because 
he did not understand her but simply loved 
her. 

Reveries about S6nya had had something 
merry and playful in them, but to dream of 
Princess Mary was always difficult and a little 
frightening. 

"How she prayed!" he thought. "It was plain 
that her whole soul was in her prayer. Yes, that 
was the prayer that moves mountains, and I 
am sure her prayer will be answered. Why 
don't I pray for what I want?" he suddenly 
thought. "What do I want? To be free, released 
from S6nya . . . She was right," he thought, re- 
membering what the governor's wife had said: 
"Nothing but misfortune can come of marry- 
ing S6nya. Muddles, grief for Mamma . . . busi- 
ness difficulties . . . muddles, terrible muddles! 
Besides, I don't love her not as I should. O, 



WAR AND PEACE 

God! release me from this dreadful, inextric- 
able position!" he suddenly began to pray. 
"Yes, prayer can move mountains, but one 
must have faith and not pray as Natdsha and I 
used to as children, that the snow might turn 
into sugar and then run out into the yard 
to see whether it had done so. No, but I am not 
praying for trifles now," he thought as he put 
his pipe down in a corner, and folding his 
hands placed himself before the icon. Softened 
by memories of Princess Mary he began to pray 
as he had not done for a long time. Tears were 
in his eyes and in his throat when the door 
opened and Lavnishka came in with some 
papers. 

"Blockhead! Why do you come in without 
being called?" cried Nicholas, quickly chang- 
ing his attitude. 

"From the governor," said Lavrushka in a 
sleepy voice. "A courier has arrived and there's 
a letter for you." 

"Well, all right, thanks. You can go!" 

Nicholas took the two letters, one of which 
was from his mother and the other from S6n- 
ya. He recognized them by the handwriting 
and opened S6nya's first. He had read only a 
few lines when he turned pale and his eyes 
opened wide with fear and joy. 

"No, it's not possible!" he cried aloud. 

Unable to sit still he paced up and down the 
room holding the letter and reading it. He 
glanced through it, then read it again, and 
then again, and standing still in the middle 
of the room he raised his shoulders, stretching 
out his hands, with his mouth wide open and 
his eyes fixed. What he had just been pray- 
ing for with confidence that God would hear 
him had come to pass; but Nicholas was as 
much astonished as if it were something ex- 
traordinary and unexpected, and as if the 
very fact that it had happened so quickly 
proved that it had not come from God to 
whom he fyad prayed, but by some ordinary 
coincidence. 

This unexpected and, as it seemed to Nich- 
olas, quite voluntary letter from S6nya freed 
him from the knot that fettered him and from 
which there had seemed no escape. She wrote 
that the last unfortunate events the loss of al- 
most the whole of the Rost6vs' Moscow prop- 
ertyand the countess* repeatedly expressed 
wish that Nicholas should marry Princess Bol- 
k6nskaya, together with his silence and cold- 
ness of late, had all combined to make her de- 
cide to release him from his promise and set 
him completely free. 


